<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Throughout the book, all renditions of Latinized Chinese words follows the Wade-Giles romanization system. However, because most readers are probably more familiar with the name Laozi and Tao Te Ching, romanization for these two term were retained. <cite>—⁠<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.E.</abbr> Editor</cite> <a href="translators-preface.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Much of what is referred in the past two paragraphs that is not directly related to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i> is not included in this ebook production, but the paragraphs are retained for context. <cite>—⁠<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.E.</abbr> Editor</cite> <a href="translators-preface.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The rest of the “Preface” by Legge solely concerns his translation of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i> and other shorter Taoist works, which was originally included in his work <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span> as published. Because these has no relevance to this ebook production of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i>, they are omitted. <cite>—⁠<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.E.</abbr> Editor</cite> <a href="translators-preface.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The “appendixes” referred here by Legge is not included in this ebook production. <cite>—⁠<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.E.</abbr> Editor</cite> <a href="translators-preface.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-6">sixth chapter</a> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> treatise, that about “the Spirit of the Valley,” is referred to in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh-tzŭ</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 1 b), as being from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang Ti</span>, from which the commentator <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Tao-chien</span> (about <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1300) takes occasion to say: “From which we know that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> was accustomed to quote in his treatise passages from earlier records⁠—as when he refers to the remarks of ‘some sage,’ of ‘some ancient,’ of ‘the sentence-makers,’ and of ‘some writer on war.’ In all these cases he is clearly introducing the words of earlier wise men. The case is like that of Confucius when he said, ‘I am a transmitter and not a maker,’ <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” Found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</i>, in <abbr class="eoc">loc.</abbr> <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See in books <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the present district of Lingbao, Shanzhou, province of Henan. <a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In an ordinary <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Student’s Manual</i> I find a note with reference to this incident to which it may be worth while to give a place here:⁠—The warden, it is said, set before <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> a dish of tea; and this was the origin of the custom of tea-drinking between host and guest (see the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">幼學故事尋源</span>, <abbr>ch.</abbr> 7, on “Food and Drink”). <a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The earlier old man of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ho</i>-side is styled in Chinese <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">河上丈人</span>; the other <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">河上公</span>; but the designation have the same meaning. Some critical objections to the genuineness of the latter’s commentary on the ground of the style are without foundation. <a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wings</i> or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Helps</i>, <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 11 a. <a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes on Chinese Literature</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 173. <a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A section of this introduction here is omitted as it solely concerned of the book <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i> and other writings by the former’s namesake, which are not included in this ebook production. <cite>—⁠<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.E.</abbr> Editor</cite> <a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Language and Languages</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 184, 185. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Natur.</abbr> <abbr>Quaest.</abbr></i> <abbr>lib.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>cap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="fr">Martineau’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Types of Ethical Theory</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 286, and his whole <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Conjectural History of Spinoza’s Thought</i>. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span> is equivalent to the Greek <i xml:lang="grc">ἡ ὁδός</i>, the way. Where this name for the Christian system occurs in our <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revised Version of the New Testament</span> in the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Acts of the Apostles</span>, the literal rendering is adhered to, Way being printed with a capital <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">W</i>. See <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Acts</span> 9:2; 19:9; 22:4; 24:14; 24:22. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">大塗</span>. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</span> dictionary</i> defines <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">tʽu</i> by <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">lu</i>, road or way. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Medhurst</i> gives “road.” Unfortunately, both <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Morrison</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Williams</i> overlooked this definition of the character. Giles has also a note in <abbr>loc.</abbr>, showing how this synonym settles the original meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in the sense of “road.” <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-25"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 25</a> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> <abbr>par.</abbr> 1. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 1 note 2. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuang Chêng-tzŭ</span> heads the list of characters in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ko Hung’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Spirit-Like Immortals</i> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">神仙傳</span>), written in our fourth century. “He was,” it is said, “an immortal of old, who lives on the hill of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung-tung</span> in a grotto of rocks.” <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For this sentence we find in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Balfour:⁠—“Spirits of the dead, receiving it, become divine; the very gods themselves owe their divinity to its influence; and by it both heaven and earth were produced.” The version of it by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Giles is too condensed:⁠—“Spiritual beings drew their spirituality thereform, while the universe became what we see it now.” <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare also <abbr>bk.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span> <abbr>parr.</abbr> 7, 8, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> <abbr>par.</abbr> 10. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Balfour had given for this sentence:⁠—“In the beginning of all things there was not even nothing. There were no names; these arose afterwards.” In his critique on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Balfour’s version in 1882, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Giles proposed:⁠—“At the beginning of all things there was nothing; but this nothing had no name.” He now in his own version gives it, “At the beginning of the beginning, even nothing did not exist. Then came the period of the nameless;”⁠—an improvement, certainly, on the other; but which can hardly be accepted as the correct version of the text. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-14"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 14</a>; et <abbr class="eoc">al.</abbr> <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-50"><abbr>Ch.</abbr> 50</a>. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is, between heaven and earth. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Amplification of the Sixteen Precepts or Maxims</i> of the second emperor of the present dynasty by his son. The words are from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Milne’s version of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Sacred Edict</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 137. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In his index of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="sa-Latn">Tripiṭaka</i>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bunyio Nanjio (<abbr>p.</abbr> 359) assigns <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Mi</span> and his work to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüen</span> dynasty. In a copy of the work in my possession they are assigned to that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>. The author, no doubt, lived under both dynasties⁠—from the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüen</span>. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>bk.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> <abbr>par.</abbr> 1. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Bk.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> <abbr>par.</abbr> 5. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Bk.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span> <abbr>par.</abbr> 2. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-19"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 19</a>. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confucian Analects</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> 36. <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> translates this by “<i xml:lang="fr">il erre à l’aventure.</i>” In 1861 I rendered it, “He moves as if his feet were entangled.” To one critic it suggests the idea of a bundle or wisp of brushwood rolled about over the ground by the wind. <a href="translators-intro-4.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The character may mean “the old boy,” and so understood have given rise to various fabulous legends; that his mother had carried him in her womb for seventy-two years (some say, for eighty-one), and that when born the child had the white hair of an old man. <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> has translated the fabulous legend of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ko Hung</span> of our fourth century about him. By that time the legends of Buddhism about <span xml:lang="sa-Latn"><i>Ś</i>ākyamuni</span> had become current in China, and were copied and applied to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> by his followers. Looking at the meaning of the two names, I am surprised no one has characterized <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> as the Chinese Seneca. <a href="translators-intro-4.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-sang Tzŭ</span> is evidently the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kêng-sang Chʽu</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang’s</span> book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei-lei Hsü</span> is supposed by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chên</span> of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> dynasty, who called himself the Lesser <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma</span>, to be the name of a book; one, in that case, of the lost books of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang</span>. But as we find the “Hill of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei-lei</span>” mentioned in <abbr>bk.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> as the scene of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-sang Tzŭ’s</span> Taoistic labours and success, I suppose that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien’s</span> reference is to that. The names are quoted by him from memory, or might be insisted on as instances of different readings. <a href="translators-intro-4.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">體道</span>, “Embodying the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.” The author sets forth, as well as the difficulty of his subject would allow him, the nature of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in itself, and its manifestation. To understand the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> one must be partaker of its nature.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-1-p-3"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 3</a> suggests the words of the apostle John, “He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love.” Both the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> ideal in the absolute, and its <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span>, or operation, are comprehended in his chapter, the latter being the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> with the name, the Mother of all things. See the <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml">third chapter of the introduction</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">養牲</span>, “The Nourishment of the Person.” But many of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung’s</span> titles are more appropriate than this.</p>
					<p>The chapter starts with instances of the antinomies, which suggest to the mind each of them the existence of its corresponding opposite; and the author finds in them an analogy to the “contraries” which characterize the operation of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, as stated in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-40">chapter 40</a>. He then proceeds to describe the action of the sage in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-2-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a> as in accordance with this law of contraries; and, in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-2-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a>, that of heaven and earth, or what we may call nature, in the process of the vegetable world.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-2-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a> should be rhymed, but I could not succeed to my satisfaction in the endeavour to rhyme it. Every one who can read Chinese will see that the first four members rhyme. The last two rhyme also, the concluding <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">隨</span> being pronounced so;⁠—see the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</span> dictionary</i> in <abbr>voc.</abbr> <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">安民</span>, “Keeping the People at Rest.” The object of the chapter is to show that government according to the Tao is unfavourable to the spread of knowledge among the people, and would keep them rather in the state of primitive simplicity and ignorance, thereby securing their restfulness and universal good order. Such is the uniform teaching of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> and his great follower <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>, and of all Taoist writers. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無源</span>, “The Fountainless.” There is nothing before the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>; it might seem to have been before God. And yet there is no demonstration by it of its presence and operation. It is like the emptiness of a vessel. The second character = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">沖</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">盅</span>;⁠—see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</i> on the latter. The practical lesson is, that in following the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> we must try to be like it. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">虛用</span>, “The Use of Emptiness.” Quiet and unceasing is the operation of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, and effective is the rule of the sage in accordance with it.</p>
					<p>The grass-dogs in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-5-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> were made of straw tied up in the shape of dogs, and used in praying for rain; and afterwards, when the sacrifice was over, were thrown aside and left uncared for. Heaven and earth and the sages dealt so with all things and with the people; but the illustration does not seem a happy one. Both <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</span> mention the grass-dogs. See especially the former, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, 25 a, b. In that book there is fully developed the meaning of this chapter. The illustration in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-5-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> is better. The Chinese bellows is difference to look at from ours, but the principle is the same in the construction of both. The <abbr>par.</abbr> concludes in a way that lends some countenance to the later Taoism’s dealing with the breath. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">成象</span>, “The Completion of Material Forms.” This title rightly expresses the import of this enigmatical chapter; but there is a foundation laid in it for the development of the later Taoism, which occupies itself with the prolongation of life by the management of the breath (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">氣</span>) or vital force.</p>
					<p>“The valley” is used metaphorically as a symbol of “emptiness” or “vacancy;” and “the spirit of the valley” is the something invisible, yet almost personal, belonging to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, which constitutes the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">德</span>) in the name of our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i>. “The spirit of the valley” has come to be a name for the activity of the Tao in all the realm of its operation. “The female mystery” is the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> with a name of chapter 1, which is “the Mother of all things.” All living beings have a father and mother. The processes of generation and production can hardly be imaged by us but by a recognition of this fact; and so <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> thought of the existing realm of nature⁠—of life⁠—as coming through an evolution (not a creation) from the primal air or breath, dividing into two, and thence appearing in the forms of things, material and immaterial. The chapter is found in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh-tzŭ</span> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 1 b) quoted by him from a book of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang-ti</span>; and here <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> has appropriated it, and made it his own. See the <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#translators-intro-1-p-3" epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Introduction</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">韜光</span>, “Sheathing the Light.” The chapter teaches that one’s best good is realised by not thinking of it, or seeking for it. Heaven and earth afford a pattern to the sage, and the sage affords a pattern to all men. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">易性</span>, “The Placid and Contented Nature.” Water, as an illustration of the way of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, is repeatedly employed by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>.</p>
					<p>The various forms of what is excellent in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-8-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> are brought forward to set forth the more, by contrast, the excellence of the humility indicated in the acceptance of the lower place without striving to the contrary. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">運夷</span>; but I cannot give a satisfactory rendering of this title. The teaching of the chapter is, that fullness and complacency in success are contrary to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.</p>
					<p>The first clauses of the two sentences in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-9-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">持而盈之, 揣而銳之, 銳而揣之</span>, are instances of the “inverted” style not uncommon in the oldest composition. “The way of Heaven” = “the Heavenly <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>” exemplified by man. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">能爲</span>, “Possibilities.” This chapter is one of the most difficult to understand and translate in the whole work. Even <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> was not able to explain the first member satisfactorily. The text of that member seems well supported; but I am persuaded the first clause of it is somehow corrupt.</p>
					<p>The whole seems to tell what can be accomplished by one who is possessed of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-10-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a> he appears free from all self-consciousness in what he does, and of all self-satisfaction in the results of his doing. The other two paragraphs seem to speak of what he can do under the guidance of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> for himself and for others. He can by his management of his vital breath bring his body to the state of Taoistic perfection, and keep his intelligent and animal souls from being separated, and he can rule men without purpose and effort. “The gates of heaven” in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-10-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> is a Taoistic phrase for the nostrils as the organ of the breath;⁠—see the commentary of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無用</span>, “The Use of what has no Substantive Existence.” The three illustrations serve to set forth the freedom of the Tao from all preoccupation and purpose, and the use of what seems useless. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">檢欲</span>, “The Repression of the Desires.” Government in accordance with the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> seeks to withdraw men from the attractions of what is external and pleasant to the senses and imagination, and to maintain the primitive simplicity of men’s ways and manners. Compare <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-2"><abbr>chap.</abbr> 2</a>. The five colours are black, red, green or blue, white, and yellow; the five notes are those of the imperfect Chinese musical scale, our G, A, B, D, E; the five tastes are salt, bitter, sour, acrid, and sweet.</p>
					<p>I am not sure that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span> has caught exactly the author’s idea in the contrast between satisfying the belly and satisfying the eyes; but what he says is ingenious: “In satisfying the belly one nourishes himself; in gratifying the eyes he makes a slave of himself.” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">厭恥</span>, “Loathing Shame.” The chapter is difficult to construe, and some disciples of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> had to ask him to explain it as in the case of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-10"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 10</a>. His remarks on it are not to my mind satisfactory. Its object seems to be to show that the cultivation of the person according to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, is the best qualification for the highest offices, even for the government of the world. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-13-p-3"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 3</a> is found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> 18 b) in a connection which suggests this view of the chapter. It may be observed, however, that in him the position of the verbal characters in the two clauses of the paragraph is the reverse of that in the text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span>, so that we can hardly accept the distinction of meaning of the two characters given in his commentary, but must take them as synonyms. Professor Gabelentz gives the following version of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chunag-tzŭ</i>: “<i xml:lang="de">Darum, gebraucht er seine Person achtsam in der Verwaltung des Reiches, so mag man ihm die Reichsgewalt anvertrauen;⁠ ⁠… liebend (schonend)⁠ ⁠… übertragen.</i>” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">贊玄</span>, “The Manifestation of the Mystery.” The subject of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-14-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> is the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, but the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in its operation, and not the primal conception of it, as entirely distinct from things, which rises before the mind in the <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-14-p-2">second paragraph</a>. The Chinese characters which I have translated “the equable,” “the inaudible,” and “the subtle,” are now pronounced, <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">yi</i>, <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">hsi</i>, and <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">wei</i>, and in 1823 <span xml:lang="fr">Rémusat</span> fancied that they were intended to give the Hebrew Tetragrammaton <span xml:lang="he">יהוה‎</span> which he thought had some to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> somehow from the west, or been found by him there. It was a mere fancy or dream; and still more so is the recent attempt to revive the notion by Victor von Strauss in 1870, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Edkins in 1884. The idea of the latter is specially strange, maintaining, as he does, that we should read the characters according to their old sounds. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> has not in the chapter a personal being before his mind, but the procedure of his mysterious <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, the course according to which the visible phenomena take place, incognisable by human sense and capable of only approximate description by term appropriate to what is within the domain of sense. See the <a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#translators-intro-3-p-8"><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">“Introduction”</span> <abbr>ch.</abbr> 3, <abbr>par.</abbr> 8</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顯德</span>, “The Exhibition of the Quality,” that is, of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, which has been set forth in the preceding chapter. Its practical outcome is here described in the masters of it of old, who in their own weakness were yet strong in it, and in their humility were mighty to be to be co-workers with it for the good of the world.</p>
					<p>The variety of the reading in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-15-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a> is considerable, but not so as to affect the meaning. This <abbr>par.</abbr> is found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>, 23 a) with an unimportant variation. From the illustration to which it is subjoined he understood the fullness, evidently as in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-9"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 9</a>, as being that of a vessel filled to overflowing. Both here and there such fullness is used metaphorically of a man overfull of himself; and then <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> slides into another metaphor, that of a worn-out garment. The text of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-15-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a> has been variously tampered with. I omit the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">久</span> of the current copies, after the example of the editors of the great recension of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung-lê</span> period (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1403⁠–⁠1424) of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> dynasty. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">歸根</span>, “Returning to the Root.” The chapter exhibits the operation of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in nature, in man, and in government; an operation silent, but all-powerful; unaccompanied with any demonstration of its presence, but great in its results.</p>
					<p>An officer receives a charge or commission from his superior (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">受命</span>); when he reports the execution of it he is said <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">復命</span>. So all animate things, including men, receive their charge from the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> as to their life, and when they have fulfilled it they are represented as reporting that fulfilment; and the fulfilment and report are described as their unchanging rule, so that they are the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao’s</span> impassive instruments, having no will or purpose of their⁠—according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> formula of “doing nothing and yet doing all things (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無爲而無不爲</span>).”</p>
					<p>The getting to possess the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, or to be an embodiment of it, follows the becoming of heaven or heaven-like; and this is in accordance with the saying in the <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-4">fourth chapter</a> that “the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> might seem to have been before God.” But, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i> especially, we often find the full possession of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is exempt from all danger of decay, is generally illustrated by a reference to the utterances in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-50"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 50</a>; as if <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> did indeed see in the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> a preservative against death. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">淳風</span>, “The Unadulterated Influence.” The influence is that of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, as seen in the earliest and paradisiacal times. The two chapters that follow are closely connected with this, showing how the silent, passionless influence of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> was gradually and injuriously superseded by “the wisdom of the world,” in the conduct of government. In the first sentence there is a small various reading of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不</span> for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">下</span>, but it does not affect the meaning of the passage. The first clause of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-17-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> gives some difficulty; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其貴言</span>, “they made their words valuable or precious,” <abbr>i.e.</abbr> “they seldom spake;” <abbr>cp.</abbr> <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">1 Samuel</span> 3:1. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">俗薄</span>, “The Decay of Manners.” A sequel to the preceding chapter, and showing also how the general decay of manners afforded opportunity for the display of certain virtues by individuals. Observe “the Great <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>,” occurring here for the first time as the designation of “the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">還淳</span>, “Return to the Unadulterated Influence.” The chapter desires a return to the simplicity of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, and shows how superior the result would be to that of the more developed systems of morals and government which had superseded it. It is closely connected with thte two chapters that precede. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> call for the renunciation of the methods of the sages and rulers in lieu of his fancied paradisiacal state is repeated <i xml:lang="la">ad nauseam</i> by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">異俗</span>, “Being Different from Ordinary Men.” The chapter sets forth the difference to external appearance which the pursuit and observance of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> produces between its votaries and others; and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> speaks in it as himself an example of the former. In the last three chapters he has been advocating the cause of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> against the learning and philosophy of the other school of thinkers in the country. Here he appears as having renounced learning, and found an end to the troubles and anxieties of his own mind; but at the expense of being misconceived and misrepresented by others. Hence the chapter has an autobiographical character.</p>
					<p>Having stated the fact following the renunciation of learning, he proceeds to dwell upon the troubles of learning in the rest of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-20-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a>. Until the votary of learning knows everything, he has no rest. But the instances which he adduces of his are not striking nor easily understood. I cannot throw any light on the four lines about the “yes” and the “yea.”</p>
					<p>Confucius (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile"><abbr>Ana.</abbr></i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>) specifies three things of which the superior man stands in awe; and these and others of a similar nature may have been the things which <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> had in his mind. The nursing-mother at the end is, no doubt, the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in operation, “with a name,” as in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-1"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 1</a>; “the mysterious virtue” of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-51">chapters 51</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-52">52</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">虛心</span>, “The Empty Heart.” But I fail to see the applicability of the title. The subject of the chapter is the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in its operation. This is the significance of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">德</span> in the first clause or line, and to render it by “virtue,” as <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> and Chalmers do, only serves to hide the meaning. <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span>, however, says that “the virtue is that of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>;” and he is right in taking <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">從</span>, the last character of the second line, as having the sense of “from,” “the source from,” and not, as Chalmers does, in the sense of “following.”</p>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> mind is occupied with a very difficult subject⁠—to describe the production of material forms of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>; how or from what, he does not say. What I have rendered “semblances,” <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> “<i xml:lang="fr">les images</i>,” and Chalmers, “forms,” seems, as the latter says, in some way to correspond to the “Eternal Ideas” of Plato in the Divine Mind. But <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> had no idea of “personality” in the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">益謙</span>, “The Increase granted to Humility.” This title rightly expresses the subject-matter of the chapter. I cannot translate the first clause otherwise than I have done. It was an old saying, which <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> found and adopted. Whether it was intended to embrace all the cases which are mentioned may be questioned, but he employs it so as to make it do so.</p>
					<p>“The emptiness” which becomes full is literally the hollowness of a cavity in the ground which is sure to be filled by overflowing water;⁠—see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 18. “The worn out” is explained by the withered foliage of a tree, which comes out new and fresh in the next spring. I have taken the first sentence of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-22-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> does;⁠—see his commentary in <abbr>loc.</abbr> <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">虛無</span>, “Absolute Vacancy.” This, I think, is the meaning of the title, “Emptiness and Nothingness,” as entire conformity to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in him who professes to be directed by it. Such a one will be omnipotent in his influence in all others. The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in him will restrain all (spasmodic) loquacity. Those who are described in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-23-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> as “failing” are not to be thought of as bad men, men given up, as <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> has it, <i xml:lang="fr">au crime</i>. They are simply ordinary men, who have failed in their study of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> and practice of it, but are won to truth and virtue by the man whom the author has in mind. As we might expect, however, the mention of such men has much embarrassed the commentators.</p>
					<p>Compare the concluding sentence with the one at the end of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-17-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1 in <abbr>ch.</abbr> 17</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">苦恩</span>, “Painful Graciousness.” The chapter should be so designated. This concludes the subject of the two previous chapters⁠—pursuing the course, the course of the unemotional <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> without vain effort or display.</p>
					<p>The remnants of food were not used as sacrificial offerings;⁠—see the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chi</i> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 82). In what I have rendered by “a tumour attached to the body,” the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">行</span> is probably, by a mistake, for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">形</span>;⁠—see a quatation by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</span>. “Which all dislike” is, literally, “Things are likely to dislike them,” the “things” being “spirits and men,” as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> explains the term. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">象玄</span>, “Representations of the Mystery.” In this chapter <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span> approaches very near to give an answer to the questions as to what the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is, and yet leaves the reader disappointed. He commences by calling it “a thing (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">物</span>);” but that term does not necessitate our regarding it as “material.” We have seen in the preceding chapter that it is used to signify “spirits and men.” Nor does his going on to speak of it as “chaotic (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">混成</span>)” necessarily lead us to conceive it as made up of the “material elements of things;” we have the same term applied in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-14"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 14</a> to the three immaterial constituents there said to be blended in the idea of it.</p>
					<p>“He does not know its name,” and he designates it by the term denoting a course of way (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span>), and indicating the phenomenal attribute, the method in which all phenomena come before our observation, in their development or evolution. And to distinguish it from all other methods of evolution, he would call it “the Great Method,” and so he employs that combination as its name in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-18"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 18</a> and elsewhere; but it cannot be said that this name has fully maintained itself in the writings of his followers. But understood thus, he here says, as in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-1"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 1</a>, that it is “the Mother of all things.” And yet, when he says that “it was before Heaven and Earth were produced,” he comes very near his affirmations in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-1">chapters 1</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-4">4</a>, that “the nameless <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> was the beginning (or originating cause) of Heaven and Earth,” and “might seem to have been before God.” Was he groping after God if haply he might find Him? I think he was, and he gets so far as to conceive of Him as “the Uncaused Cause,” but comes short of the idea of His personality. The other subordinate causes which he mentions all get their force or power from the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, but after all the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is simply a spontaneity, evolving from itself, and not acting from a personal will, consciously in the direction of its own wisdom and love. “Who can by searching find out God? Who can find out the Almighty to perfection?”</p>
					<p>The predicate of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in the chapter, most perplexing to myself, is “<em>It</em> returns,” in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-25-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr>3</a>. “It flows away, far away, and comes back;”⁠—are not the three statements together equal to “It is everywhere?” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">重德</span>, “The Quality of Gravity.” Gravity and stillness are both attributes of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>; and he who cultivates it must not give way to lightness of mind, or hasty action.</p>
					<p>The rule for a leader not to separate from his baggage waggons is simply the necessity of adhering ot gravity. I have adopted from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span> the reading of “the wise prince” for “the sage,” which is found in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span>; and later on the reading of “has lost his root” for his “loses his ministers,” though the latter is found also in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">巧用</span>, “Dexterity in Using,” that is, in the application of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. This is the substance of the chapter, celebrating the effective but invisible operation of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, and the impartial exercise of it for the benefit of all men and all things.</p>
					<p>I have given the most natural construction of the two characters at the end of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-27-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a>, the only possible construction of them, so far as I can see, suitable to the context. The action of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> (non-acting and yet all-efficient) and that of the sage in accordance with it, are veiled by their nature of the sight of ordinary men.</p>
					<p>It is more difficult the catch the scope and point of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-27-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a>. If there were not the conditions described in it, it would be hard for even an intelligent onlooker to distinguish between the man who had the skill and the man without it, between his who possessed the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, and him who had it not, which would be strange indeed. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">反樸</span>, “Returning to Simplicity.” The chapter sets forth humility and simplicity, and artless freedom from all purpose, as characteristic of the man of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, such as he was in the primeval time. “The sage” in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-28-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> may be “the Son of Heaven,”⁠—the head of all rule in the kingdom, or the feudal lord in a state. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無爲</span>, “Taking no Action.” All efforts made with a purpose are sure to fail. The nature of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> necessitates their doing so, and the uncertainty of things and events teaches the same lesson.</p>
					<p>That the kingdom or throne is a “spirit-like vessel” has become a common enough saying among the Chinese. <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> has, “<i xml:lang="fr">L’Empire est comme un vase divin;</i>” but I always shrink from translating <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">神</span> by “divine.” Its English analogue is “spirit,” and the idea in the text is based on the immunity of spirit from all material law, and the uncertain issue of attempts to deal with it according to ordinary methods. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> takes the phrase as equivalent to “superintended by spirits,” which is as inadmissible as <span xml:lang="fr">Julien’s</span> “<i xml:lang="fr">divin.</i>” The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> forbids action with a personal purpose, and all such action is sure to fail in the greatest things as well as in the least. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">儉武</span>, “A Caveat against War.” War is contrary to the spirit of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, and, as being so, is productive of misery, and leads to early ruin. It is only permissible in a case of necessity, and even then its spirit and tendencies must be guarded against.</p>
					<p>In translating <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">果</span> by “striking a decisive blow,” I have, no doubt, followed <span xml:lang="fr">Julien’s</span> “<i xml:lang="fr">frapper un coup décisif.</i>” The same <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">果</span> occurs six times in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-30-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a>, followed by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span> says that in all but the first instance the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">而</span> should be taken as equivalent to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">於</span>, so that we should have to translate, “He is determined against being vain,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> But there is no necessity for such a construction of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span>.</p>
					<p>“Weakness” and not “strength” is the character of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>; hence the lesson in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-30-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">偃武</span>, “Stilling War.” The chapter continues the subject of the preceding. The imperially-appointed editors of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Text and Commentary</i> (1765) say that from the beginning of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-31-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> to the end, there is the appearance of text and commentary being mixed together; but they make no alteration in the text as it is found in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span>, and in all other ancient copies.</p>
					<p>The concluding sentence will suggest to some readers the words of the Duke of Wellington, that to gain a battle was the saddest thing next to losing it. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">聖德</span>. Chalmers translates this by “sagely virtue.” But I cannot adopt that rendering, and find it difficult to supply a better. The “virtue” is evidently the attribute of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> come out from the condition of the absolute, and capable of being named. In the former state it has no name; in the latter, it has. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-32-p-1"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 1</a> and the commencement of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-32-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a> must both be explained from <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-1"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 1</a>.</p>
					<p>The “primordial simplicity” in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-32-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> is the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in its simplest conception, alone, and by itself, and the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">始制</span> in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-32-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a> is that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> come forth into operation and become <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span>, the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span> which affords a law for men. From this to the end of the paragraph is very obscure. I have translated from the text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span>. The text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> is different, and he comments upon it as it stands, but to me it is inexplicable. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">辨德</span>, “Discriminating between (different) Attributes.” The teaching of the chapter is that the possession of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> confers the various attributes which are here most distinguished. It has been objected to it that elsewhere the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is represented as associated with dullness and not intelligence, and with weakness and not with strength. But these seem to be qualities viewed from without, and acting on what is beyond itself. Inwardly, its qualities are the very opposite, and its action has the effect of enlightening what is dark, and overcoming what is strong.</p>
					<p>More interesting are the predicates in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-33-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span> gives the comment on it of the Indian monk, <span xml:lang="sa-Latn">Kumārajīva</span>, “one of the four suns of Buddhism,” and who went to China in <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 401: “To be alive and yet not alive may well be called long; to die and yet not be dead may well be called longevity.” He also gives the view of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu Nung-shih</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1042⁠–⁠1102) that the freedom from change of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh-tzŭ</span>, from the death of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>, and from extinction of the Buddhists, have all the same meaning as the concluding saying of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> here; that the human body is like the covering of the caterpillar or the skin of the snake; that we occupy it but for a passing sojourn. No doubt, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> believed in another life for the individual after the present. Many passages in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> indicate the same faith. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">任成</span>, “The Task of Achievement.” The subject is the greatness of what the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, called here by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> own name for it in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-25"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 25</a>, does; and the unconscious simplicity with which it does it; and then the achievements of the sage who is permeated by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-34-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a> is descriptive of the influence of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in the vegetable world. The statements and expressions are much akin to those in parts of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-2">chapters 2</a>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-10">10</a>, and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-51">51</a>, and for <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung’s</span> difficult reading of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不名有</span> some copies give <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而不居</span>, as in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-2">chapter 2</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁德</span>, “The Attribute of Benevolence.” But there seems little appropriateness in this title. The subject of the chapter is the inexhaustible efficacy of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> for the good of the world.</p>
					<p>The Great Image (of the invisible <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>) is a name for the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in its operation; as in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-14">chapters 14</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-41">41</a>. He who embodies this in his government will be a centre of attraction for all the world. Or the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">天下住</span> may be taken as a predicate of the holder of the Great Image:⁠—“If he go all under heaven teaching the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.” Both constructions are maintained by commentators of note. In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-35-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> the attraction of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is contrasted with that of ordinary pleasures and gratifications. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">微明</span>, “Minimising the Light;” equivalent, as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> has pointed out, to the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">襲明</span> of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-27"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 27</a>.</p>
					<p>The gist of the chapter is to be sought in the <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-36-p-2">second paragraph</a>, where we have two instances of the action of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> by contraries, supposed always to be for good.</p>
					<p>But there is a difficulty in seeing the applicability to this cases mentioned in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-36-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a>. The first case, indeed is merely a natural phenomenon, having no moral character; but the others, as they have been illustrated from historical incidents, by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span> and others at least, belong to schemes of selfish and unprincipled ambitious strategy, which it would be injurious to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> to suppose that he intended.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-36-p-3"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 3</a> is the most frequently quoted of all the passages in our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i>, unless it be the first part of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-1"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 1</a>. Fishes taken from the deep, and brought into shallow water, can be easily taken or killed; that is plain enough. “The sharp instruments of a state” are not its “weapons of war,” nor its “treasures,” nor its “instruments of government,” that is, its rewards and punishments, though this last is the interpretation often put on them, and sustained by a foolish reference to an incident, real or coined, in the history of the dukedom of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>. The <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">li chʽi</i> are “contrivances for gain,” machines, and other methods to increase the wealth of a state, but, according to the principles of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>, really injurious to it. These should not be shown to the people, whom the Taoistic system would keep in a state of primitive simplicity and ignorance. This interpretation is in accordance with the meaning of the characters, and with the general teaching of Taoism. In no other way can I explain the paragraph so as to justify the place undoubtedly belonging to it in the system. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲政</span>, “The Exercise of Government.” This exercise should be according to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, doing without doing, governing without government.</p>
					<p>The subject of the <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-37-p-3">third paragraph</a> is a feudal prince of the king, and he is spoken of in the first person, to give more vividness to the style, unless the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吾</span>, “I,” may, possibly, be understood of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> himself, personating one of them. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">論德</span>, “About the Attributes;” of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, that is. It is not easy to render <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span> here by any other English term than “virtue,” and yet there would be a danger of its thus misleading us in the interpretation of the chapter.</p>
					<p>The “virtue” is the activity or operation of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, which is supposed to have come out of its absoluteness. Even <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span> so defines it here⁠—“<i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</i> is the meritorious work of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.”</p>
					<p>In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-38-p-5"><abbr>par.</abbr> 5</a> we evidently have a resume of the preceding paragraphs, and, as it is historical, I translate them in the past tense; though what took place on the early stage of the world may also be said to go on taking place in the experience of every individual. With some considerable hesitation I have given the subjects in those paragraphs in the concrete, in deference to the authority of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> and most other commentators. The former says, “By ‘the highest <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span>’ is to be understood the rulers of the greatest antiquity, without name or designation, whose virtue was great, and could not be surpassed.” Most ingenious, and in accordance with the Taoistic system, is the manner in which <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> construes the passage, and I am surprised that it has not been generally accepted. By “the higher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span>” he understands, “the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>,” that which is prior to and above the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">上德者, 在德之上, 道也</span>); by “the lower <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span>,” benevolence, that which is after and below the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span> which is above benevolence; by “the higher righteousness,” the benevolence which is above righteousness; and by “the higher propriety,” the righteousness which is above propriety. Certainly in the summation of these four paragraphs which we have in the fifth, the subjects of them would appear to have been in the mind of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> as thus defined by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>.</p>
					<p>In the reminder of the chapter he goes on to speak depreciatingly of ceremonies and knowledge, so that the whole chapter must be understood as descriptive of the process of decay and deterioration from the early time in which the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> and its attributes swayed the societies of men. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">法本</span>, “The Origin of the Law.” In this title there is a reference to the law given to all things by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, as described in the conclusion of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-25">chapter 25</a>. And the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> affords that law by its passionless, undemonstrative nature, through which in its spontaneity, doing nothing for the sake of doing, it yet does all things.</p>
					<p>The difficulty of translation is in the <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-39-p-3">third paragraph</a>. The way in which princes and kings speak depreciatingly of themselves in adduced as illustrating how they have indeed got the spirit of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>; and I accept the last epithet as given by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span>, “naveless” (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">轂</span>), instead of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">穀</span> (= “the unworthy”), which is found in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span>, and has been adopted by nearly all subsequent editors. To see its appropriateness here, we have only to refer back to <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-11">chapter 11</a>, where the thirty spokes, and the nave, empty to receive the axle, are spoken of, and it is shown how the usefulness of the carriage is derived from that emptiness of the nave. This also enables us to give a fair and consistent explanation of the difficult clause which follows, in which also I have followed the text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span>. For his <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">車</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span> has <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">輿</span>, which also is found in a quotation of it by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan Tzŭ</span>; but this need not affect the meaning. In the translation of the clause we are assisted by a somewhat similar illustration about a horse in the twenty-fifth of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ’s</span> books, <abbr>par.</abbr> 10. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">去用</span>, “Dispensing with the Use (of Means);”⁠—with their use, that is, as it appears to us. The subject of the brief chapter is the action of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> by contraries, leading to a result the opposite of what existed previously, and by means which might seem calculated to produce a contrary result.</p>
					<p>In translating <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-40-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> I have followed <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span>, who finds the key to it in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-1"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 1</a>. Having a name, the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is “the mother of all things;” having no name, it is “the originator of heaven and earth.” But here is the teaching of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>:⁠—“If <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> seem to be before God,” <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> itself sprang from nothing. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">同異</span>, “Sameness and Difference.” The chapter is a sequel of the preceding, and may be taken as an illustration of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao’s</span> proceeding by contraries.</p>
					<p>Who the sentence-makers were whose sayings are quoted we cannot tell, but it would have been strange if <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> had not had a large store of such sentences at this command. The fifth and sixth of those employed by him here are found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh-tzŭ</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 15 a), spoken by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span> in reproving <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yang Chu</span>, and in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 3 a, that heretic appears quoting an utterance of the same kind, with the words, “according to an old saying (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">古語有之</span>).” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道化</span>, “The Transformations of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.” In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-42-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> we have the case of the depreciating epithets given to themselves by kings and princes, which we found before in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-39"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 39</a>, and a similar lesson is drawn from it. Such depreciation leads to exaltation, and the contrary course of self-exaltation leads to abasement. This latter case is stated emphatically in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-42-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> says that it was the basis of his teaching. So far therefore we have in this chapter a repetition of the lesson that “the movement of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is by contraries,” and that its weakness is the sure precursor of strength. But the connection between this lesson and what he says in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-42-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> it is difficult to trace. Up to this time at least it has baffled myself. The passage seems to give us a cosmogony. “The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> produced One.” We have already seen that the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is “The One.” Are we to understand here that the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> and The One were one and the same? In this case what would be the significance of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">生</span> (“produced”)?⁠—that the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> which had been previously “non-existent” now became “existent,” or capable of being named? This seem to be the view of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Kuang</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1009⁠–⁠1086).</p>
					<p>The most singular form which this view assumes is in one of the treatises on our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i>, attributed to the Taoist patriarch <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü</span> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">呂祖道德經解</span>), that “the One is Heaven, which was formed by the congealing of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.” According to another treatise, also assigned to the same <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü</span> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">道德真經合解</span>), the One was “the primordial ether;” the Two, “the separation of that into its Yin and Yang constituents;” and the Three, “the production of heaven, earth, and man by these.” In quoting the paragraph, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan Tzŭ</span> omits <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道生一</span>, and commences with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">一生二</span>, and his glossarist, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kao Yu</span>, makes out the One to be the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, the Two to be Spiritual Intelligences (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">神明</span>), and the Three to be the Harmonising Breath. From the mention of the Yin and Yang that follows, I believe that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> intended by the Two these two qualities or elements in the primordial ether, which would be “the One.” I dare not hazard a guess as to what “the Three” were. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">徧用</span>, “The Universal Use (of the action in weakness of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>).” The chapter takes us back to the lines of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-40"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 40</a>, that</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Weakness marks the course</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao’s</span> mighty deeds.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">By “the softest thing in the world” it is agreed that we are to understand “water,” which will wear away the hardest rocks. “Dashing against and overcoming” is a metaphor taken from hunting. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> says that “what has no existence” is the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>; it is better to understand by it the unsubstantial air (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">氣</span>) which penetrates everywhere, we cannot see how.</p>
					<p>Compare <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-43-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> with <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-2-p-3"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 2, <abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">立戒</span>, “Cautions.” The chapter warns men to let nothing come into competition with the value which they set on the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is not named, indeed, but the idea of it was evidently in the writer’s mind.</p>
					<p>The whole chapter rhymes after a somewhat peculiar fashion; familiar enough, however, to one who is acquainted with the old rhymes of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Book of Poetry</i>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">洪德</span>, “Great or Overflowing Virtue.” The chapter is another illustration of the working of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> by contraries.</p>
					<p>According to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span>, the action which overcomes cold is that of the yang element in the developing primordial ether; and the stillness which overcomes heat is that of the contrary yin element. These may have been in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> mind, but the statements are so simple as hardly to need any comment. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> further says that the purity and stillness are descriptive of the condition of non-action. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">儉欲</span>, “The Moderating of Desire or Ambition.” The chapter shows how the practice of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> must conduce to contentment and happiness.</p>
					<p>In translating <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-46-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> I have, after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span>, admitted a <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">車</span> after the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">糞</span>, his chief authority for doing so being that it is so found in a poetical piece by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Hêng</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 78⁠–⁠139). <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> also adopted this reading (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">朱子大全</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> 7 a). In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-46-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Ying</span> has a tempting variation of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">多欲</span> for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">可欲</span>, but I have not adopted it because the same phrase occurs elsewhere. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鑒遠</span>, “Surveying what is Far-off.” The chapter is a lesson to men to judge of things according to their internal conviction of similar things in their own experience. Short as the chapter is, it is somewhat mystical. The phrase, “The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>” or way of Heaven, occurs in it for the first time; and it is difficult to lay down its precise meaning. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> would seem to teach that man is a microcosm; and that, if he understand the movements of his own mind, he can understand the movements of all other minds. There are various readings, of which it is not necessary to speak.</p>
					<p>I have translated <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-47-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> in the past tense, and perhaps the first should also be translated so. Most of it is found in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Ying</span>, preceded by “formerly” or “anciently.” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忘知</span>, “Forgetting Knowledge;”⁠—the contrast between Learning and the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. It is only by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> that the world can be won.</p>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span> commences his quotations of commentary on this chapter with the following <span xml:lang="sa-Latn">Kumārajīva</span> on the <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-48-p-2">second <abbr>par.</abbr></a>:⁠—“He puts it away till he has forgotten all that was bad in it. He then puts away all that is fine about him. He does so till he has forgotten all that was good in it. But the bad was wrong, and the good is right. Having diminished the wrong, and also diminished the right, the process is carried on till they are both forgotten. Passion and desire are both cut off; and his virtue and the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> are in such union that he does nothing; but though he does nothing, he allows all things to do their own doing, and all things are done.” Such is a Buddhistic view of the passage, not very intelligible, and which I do not endorse.</p>
					<p>In a passage in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i> (<abbr>Bk.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> <abbr>Art.</abbr> 2), we have a Confucian view of the passage:⁠—“Let perspicacity, intelligence, shrewdness, and wisdom be guarded by stupidity, and the service of the possessor will affect the whole world; let them be guarded by complaisance, and his daring and strength will shake the age; let them be guarded by timidity, and his wealth will be all within the four seas; let them be guarded by humility, and there will be what we call the method of ‘diminishing it, and diminishing it again.’ ” But neither do I endorse this.</p>
					<p>My own view of the scope of the chapter has been given above in a few words. The greater part of it is found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">任德</span>, “The Quality of Indulgence.” The chapter shows how that quality enters largely into the dealing of the sage with other men, and exercises over them a transforming influence, dominated as it is in him by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.</p>
					<p>My version of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-49-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> is taken from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Chalmers. A good commentary on it was given by the last emperor but one of the earlier of the two great <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> dynasties, in the period <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1111⁠–⁠1117:⁠—“The mind of the sage is free from preoccupation and able to receive; still, and able to to respond.”</p>
					<p>In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-49-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> I adopt the reading of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">得</span> (“to get”) instead of the more common <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">德</span> (“virtue” or “quality”). There is a passage in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Ying</span> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> 3 b, 4 a), the style of which, most readers will probably agree with me in thinking, was moulded on the text before us, though nothing is said of any connection between it and the saying of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>. I must regard it as a sequel to the conversation between Confucius and some of his disciples about the principle (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> principle) that “Injury should be recompensed with kindness,” as recorded in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile"><abbr>Con.</abbr> <abbr>Ana.</abbr></i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> 36. We read:⁠—“<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span> said, ‘When men are good to me, I will also be good to them; when they are not good to me, I will also be not good to them.’ <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span> said, ‘When men are good to me, I will also be good to them; when they are not good to me, I will simply lead them on, forwards it maybe or backwards.’ <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hui</span> said, ‘When men are good to me, I will also be good to them; when they are not good to me, I will still be good to them.’ The views of the three disciples being thus different, they referred the point to the Master, who said, ‘The words of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span> are such as might be expected among the (wild tribes of) the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Man</span> and the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mo</span>; those of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span>, such as might be expected among friends; those of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span>, such as might be expected among relatives and near connections.’ ” This is all. The Master was still far from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> standpoint, and that of his own favourite disciple, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hui</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">貴生</span>, “The Value set on Life.” The chapter sets forth the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> as an antidote against decay and death.</p>
					<p>In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-50-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> life is presented to us as intermediate between two non-existences. The words will suggest to many readers those in <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Job</span> 1:21.</p>
					<p>In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-50-p-2"><abbr>pars.</abbr> 2</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-50-p-3">3</a> I translate the characters <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">十有三</span> by “three in ten,” instead of by “thirteen,” as <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> and other translators have done. The characters are susceptible of either translation according to the tone in which we read the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有</span>. They were construed as I have done by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span>; and many of the best commentators have followed in his wake. “The ministers of life to themselves” would be those who eschewed all things, both internal and external, tending to injure health; “the ministers of death,” those who pursued courses likely to cause disease and shorten life; the third three would be those who thought that by mysterious and abnormal courses they could prolong life, but only injured it. Those three classes being thus disposed of, there remains only one in ten rightly using the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, and he is spoken of in the next paragraph.</p>
					<p>This <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-50-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a> is easy of translation, and the various readings in it are unimportant, differing in this respect from those in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-50-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a>. But the aim of the author in it is not clear. In ascribing such effects to the possession of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, is he “trifling,” as <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Chalmers thinks? or indulging the play of his poetical fancy? or simply saying that the Taoist will keep himself out of danger? <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">養德</span>, “The Operation (of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>) in Nourishing Things.” The subject of the chapter is the quiet passionless operation of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in nature, in the production and nourishing of things throughout the seasons of the year;⁠—a theme dwelt on by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>, in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-2-p-4"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 4</a>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-10-p-3"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> 3</a>, and other places.</p>
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is the subject of all the predicates in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-51-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a>, and what seem the subjects in all but the first member should be construed adverbially.</p>
					<p>On <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-51-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> says that the honour of the Son of Heaven is derived from his appointment by God, and that then the nobility of the feudal princes is derived from him; but in the honour given to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> and the nobility ascribed to its operation, we are not to think of any external ordination. There is a strong reading of two of the members of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-51-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a> in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span>, <abbr>viz.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亭之毒之</span> for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">成之熟之</span>. This is quoted and predicated of “heaven,” in the Nestorian Monument of Xi’an in the eighth century. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">歸元</span>, “Returning to the Source.” The meaning of the chapter is obscure, and the commentators give little help in determining it. As in the preceding chapter, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> treats of the operation of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> on material things, he seems in this to go on to the operation of it in man, or how he, with his higher nature, should ever be maintaining it in himself.</p>
					<p>For the understanding of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-52-p-1">paragraph 1</a> we must refer to the first chapter of the treatise, where the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, “having no name,” appears as “the Beginning” or “First Cause” of the world, and then, “having a name,” as its “Mother.” It is the same thing or concept in both of its phases, the ideal or absolute, and the manifestation of it in its passionless doings. The old Jesuit translators render this <abbr>par.</abbr> by “<i xml:lang="la">Mundus principium et causam suam habet in Divino</i> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有</span> <i xml:lang="la">seu actione Divinae sapientiae quae dici potest ejus mater</i>.” So far I may assume that they agreed with me in understanding that the subject of the <abbr>par.</abbr> was the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-52-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a> lays down the law of life for man thus derived from the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. The last clause of it is given by the same translators as equivalent to “<i xml:lang="la">Unde fit ut post mortem nihil ei timendum sit</i>,”⁠—a meaning which the characters will not bear. But from that clause, and the next <abbr>par.</abbr>, I am obliged to conclude that even in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> mind there was the germ of sublimation of the material frame which issued in the asceticism and life-preserving arts of the later Taoism.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-52-p-3"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 3</a> seems to indicate the method of “guarding the mother in man,” by watching over the breath, the proto-plastic “one” of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-42"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 42</a>, the ethereal matter out of which all material things were formed. The organs of this breath in man are the mouth and nostrils (nothing else should be understood here by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">兌</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">門</span>;⁠—see the explanations of the former in the last <abbr>par.</abbr> of the fifth of the appendixes to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</i> in <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 432); and the management of the breath is the mystery of the esoteric Buddhism and Taoism.</p>
					<p>In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-52-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a> “The guarding what is soft” is derived from the used of “the soft lips” in hiding and preserving the hard and strong teeth.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-52-p-5"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 5</a> gives the gist of the chapter:⁠—Man’s always keeping before him the ideal of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, and, without purpose, simply doing whatever he finds to do; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>-like and powerful in all his sphere of action.</p>
					<p>I have followed the reading of the last character but one, which is given by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span> instead of that found in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">益證</span>, “Increase of Evidence.” The chapter contrasts government by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> with that conducted in a spirit of ostentation and by oppression.</p>
					<p>In the “I” of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-53-p-1">paragraph 1</a> does <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> speak of himself? I think he does. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> understands it of “any man,” <abbr>i.e.</abbr> any one in the exercise of government;⁠—which is possible. What is peculiar to my version is the pregnant meaning given to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有如</span>, common enough in the mouth of Confucius. I have adopted it here because of a passage in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsiang’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shuo-yüan</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> 13 b), where <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> is made to say “Excessive is the difficulty of practising the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> at the present time,” adding that the princes of his age would not receive it from him. On the “Great <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>,” see <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-25">chapter 25</a>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-34">34</a>, et <abbr class="eoc">al.</abbr> From the twentieth book of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</i> (12 b and 13 a) I conclude that he had the whole of this chapter in his copy of our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i>, but he broke it up, after his fashion, into fragmentary utterances, confused and confounding. He gives also some remarkable various readings, one of which (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">竽</span>, instead of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi’s</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夸</span>, character 48) is now generally adopted. The passage is quoted in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</span> dictionary</i> under <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">竽</span> with this reading. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">修觀</span>, “The Cultivation (of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>), and the Observation (of its Effects).” The sentiment of the first paragraph is found in the <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-27">twenty-seventh</a> and other previous chapters⁠—that the noiseless and imperceptible acting of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is irresistible in its influence; and this runs through to the end of the chapter with the additional appeal to the influence of its effects. The introduction of the subject of sacrifices, a religious rite, though not presented to the highest object, will strike the reader as peculiar in our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i>.</p>
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span> mentioned five times in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-54-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> is the “virtue” of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> embodied in the individual, and extending from him in all the spheres of his occupation, and is explained differently by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span> according to its application; and his example I have to some extent followed.</p>
					<p>The force of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-54-p-3"><abbr>pars.</abbr> 3</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-54-p-4">4</a> is well given by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span>. On the first clause he says, “Take the person of one who cultivates the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, and compare it with that of one who does not cultivate it;⁠—which is in a state of decay? and which is in a state of preservation? <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">玄符</span>, “The Mysterious Charm;” meaning, apparently, the entire passivity of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.</p>
					<p>With <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-55-p-1"><abbr>pars.</abbr> 1</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-55-p-2">2</a>, compare what is said about the infant in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-10">chapters 10</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-20">20</a>, and about the immunity from dangers such as here described of the disciples of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-50"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 50</a>. My “evil” in the second triplet of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-55-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a> has been translated by “felicity;” but a reference to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</i> dictionary will show that the meaning which I give to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">祥</span> is well authorised. It is the only meaning allowable here. The third and fourth <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曰</span> in this <abbr>par.</abbr> appear in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung’s</span> text as <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">日</span>, and he comments on the clauses accordingly; but <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曰</span> is now the received reading. Some light is thrown on this paragraph and the next by an apocryphal conversation attributed to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsiang’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shuo-yüan</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, 4 a. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">玄德</span>, “The Mysterious Excellence.” The chapter gives us a picture of the man of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, humble and retiring, oblivious of himself and of other men, the noblest man under heaven.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-56-p-1"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 1</a> is found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> 20 b), not expressly mentioned, as taken from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>, but at the end of a string of sentiments, ascribed the “the Master,” some of them, like the two clause here, no doubt belonging to him, and the others, probably <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ’s</span> own.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-56-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a> is all found in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-4">chapters 4</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-52">52</a>, excepting the short clause in the conclusion. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">淳風</span>, “The Genuine Influence.” The chapter shows how government by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> is alone effective, and of universal application; contrasting it with the failure of other methods.</p>
					<p>After the “weapons of war” in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-57-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a>, one is tempted to take “the sharp implements” in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-57-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> as such weapons, but the meaning which I finally adopted, especially after studying <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-36">chapters 36</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-80">80</a>, seems more consonant with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> scheme of thought. In the last member of the same <abbr>par.</abbr>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> has the strange reading of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">法物</span>, and uses it in his commentary; but the better text of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">法令</span> is found both in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</i>, and in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</i>.</p>
					<p>We do not know if the writer were quoting any particular sage in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-57-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a>, or referring generally to the sages of the past;⁠—men like the “sentence-makers” of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-41"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 41</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">順化</span>, “Transformation according to Circumstances;” but this title does not throw light on the meaning of the chapter; nor are we helped to an understanding of it by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span>, with his additions and comments (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> 3 b, 4 b), nor by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</span> with his illustrations (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> 21 a, b). The difficulty of it is increased by its being separated form the preceding chapter of which it is really the sequel. It contrasts still further government by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> with that by the method of correction. The sage is the same in both chapters, his character and government both marked by the opposites or contraries which distinguish the procedure of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> as stated in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-40"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 40</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">守道</span>, “Guarding the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.” The chapter shows how it is the guarding of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> that ensures a continuance of long life, with vigour and success. The abuse of it and other passages in our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i> helped on, I must believe, the later Taoist dreams about the elixir vitae and life-preserving pills. The whole of it, with one or two various readings, is found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 4 b⁠–⁠6 a), who speaks twice in his comments of the book.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-59-p-1"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 1</a> has been translated, “In governing men and in serving Heaven, there is nothing like moderation.” But by “Heaven” there is not intended “the blue sky” above us, nor any personal Power above it, but the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> embodied in our constitution, the heavenly element in our nature. The “moderation” is the opposite of what we call “living fast,” “burning the candle at both ends.”</p>
					<p>In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-59-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> I must read <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">復</span>, instead of the more common <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">服</span>. Its meaning is the same as in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">復歸其明</span> in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-52-p-5"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 52, <abbr>par.</abbr> 5</a>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tê</span> is not “virtue” in our common meaning of the term, but “the attributes of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>,” as almost always with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">居位</span>, “Occupying the Throne;” occupying it, that is, according to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, noiselessly and purposelessly, so that the people enjoy their lives, free from all molestation seen and unseen.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-60-p-1"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 1</a>, that is, in the most quiet and easy manner. The whole of the chapter is given and commented on by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 6 a⁠–⁠7 b); but very unsatisfactorily.</p>
					<p>The more one thinks and reads about the rest of the chapter the more does he agree with the words of <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span>:⁠—“It presents the frequent recurrence of the same characters, and appears as insignificant as it is unintelligible, if we give to the Chinese characters their ordinary meaning.”⁠—The reader will observe that we have here the second mention of spirits (the manes; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Chalmers</i>, “the ghosts;” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Julien</i>, <i xml:lang="fr">les démons</i>). See <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-39"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 39</a>.</p>
					<p>Whatever <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> meant to teach in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-60-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a>, he laid in it a foundation for the superstition of the later and present Taoism about the spirits of the dead;⁠—such as appeared a few years ago in the “tail-cutting” scare. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">謙德</span>, “The Attribute of Humility;”⁠—a favourite theme with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>; and the illustration of it from the low-lying stream to which smaller streams flow is also a favourite subject with him. The language can hardly but recall the words of a greater than <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>:⁠—“He that humbleth himself shall be exalted.” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲道</span>, “Practising the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.” <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">貴道</span>, “The value set on the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>,” would have been a more appropriate title. The chapter sets forth that value in various manifestations of it.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-62-p-1"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 1</a> For the meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">奧</span>, see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confucian Analects</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <abbr>ch.</abbr> 13.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-62-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a> I am obliged to adopt the reading of the first sentence of this paragraph given by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">美言可以市尊, 美行可以加人</span>;⁠—see especially his quotation of it in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> 10 a, as from a superior man, I have not found his reading anywhere else.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-62-p-3"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 3</a> is not easily translated, or explained. See the rules on presenting offerings at the court of a ruler or the kind, in <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span> of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 84, note 3, and also a narrative in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chuan</i> under the thirty-third year of duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsi</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">思始</span>, “Thinking in the Beginning.” The former of these two characters is commonly misprinted <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">恩</span>, and this has led Chalmers to mistranslate them by “The Beginning of Grace.” The chapter sets forth the passionless method of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, and how the sage accordingly accomplishes his objects easily by forestalling in his measures all difficulties. In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-63-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> the clauses are indicative, and not imperative, and therefore we have to supplement the text in translating in some such way, as I have done. They give us a cluster of aphorisms illustrating the procedure of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> “by contraries,” and conclude with one, which is the chief glory of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> teaching, though I must think that its value is somewhat diminished by the method in which he reaches it. It has not the prominence in the later teaching of Taoist writers which we should expect, nor is it found (so far as I know) in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</i>, or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</i>. It is quoted, however, twice by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsiang</span>;⁠—see my <a href="#note-85">note on <abbr>par.</abbr> 2 of <abbr>ch.</abbr> 49</a>.</p>
					<p>It follows from the whole chapter that the Taoistic “doing nothing” was not an absolute quiescence and inaction, but had a method in it. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">守微</span>, “Guarding the Minute.” The chapter is a continuation and enlargement of the last. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span>, indeed, unites the two, blending them together with some ingenious transpositions and omissions, which is not necessary to discuss. Compare the first part of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-64-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a> with the last part of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-29-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1, <abbr>ch.</abbr> 29</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">淳德</span>, “Pure, unmixed Excellence.” The chapter shows the powerful and beneficent influence of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> in government, in contrast with the applications and contrivances of human wisdom. Compare <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-19"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 19</a>. My “simple and ignorant” is taken from <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span>. More literally the translation would be “to make them stupid.” My “scourge” in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-65-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> is also after <span xml:lang="fr">Julien’s</span> <i xml:lang="fr">fléau</i>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">後己</span>, “Putting one’s self Last.” The subject is the power of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, by its display of humility in attracting men. The subject and the way in which it is illustrated are frequent themes in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i>. See <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-8">chapters 8</a>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-22">22</a>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-39">39</a>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-42">42</a>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-61">61</a>, et <abbr class="eoc">al.</abbr></p>
					<p>The last sentence of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-66-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a> is found also in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-22"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 22</a>. There seem to be no quotations from the chapter in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</i> or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</i>; but <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> quotes passages from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tung Chung-shu</span> (of the second century <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>), and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yang Hsiung</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 53⁠–⁠<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 18), which seem to show that the phraseology of it was familiar to them. The former says:⁠—“When one places himself in his qualities below others, his person is above them; when he places them behind those of others, his person is before them;” the other, “Men exalt him who humbles himself below them; and give the precedence to him who puts himself behind them.” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">三寶</span>, “The Three Precious Things.” This title is taken from <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-67-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a>, and suggests to us how the early framer of these titles intended to express by them the subject-matter of their several chapters. The three things are the three distinguishing qualities of the possessor of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, the three great moral qualities appearing in its followers, the qualities, we may venture to say, of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> itself. The same phrase is now the common designation of Buddhism in China⁠—the <span xml:lang="sa-Latn">Tri-ratna</span> or <span xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ratna-traya</span>, “the Precious Buddha,” “the Precious Law,” and “the Precious Priesthood (or rather Monkhood) or Church;” appearing also in the “<span xml:lang="sa-Latn">Tri-śaraṇa</span>,” or “formula of the Three Refuges,” what <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Eitel calls “the most primitive <i xml:lang="la">formula fidei</i> of the early Buddhists, introduced before Southern and Northern Buddhism separated.” I will not introduce the question of whether Buddhism borrowed this designation of Taoism, after its entrance into China. It is in Buddhism the formula of a peculiar church or religion; in Taoism a rule for the character, or the conduct which the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> demands from all mean. “My <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>” in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-67-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> is the reading of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span>; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung’s</span> text is simply <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">我</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi’s</span> reading is now generally adopted.</p>
					<p>The concluding sentiment of the chapter is equivalent to the saying of Mencius (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman"><b>iv</b></span> 2), “If the ruler of a state love benevolence, he will have no enemy under heaven.” “Heaven” is equivalent to “the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>,” the course of events⁠—Providence, as we should say. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">配天</span>, “Matching Heaven.” The chapter describes the work of the practiser of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> as accomplished like that of Heaven, without striving or crying. He appears under the figure of a mailed warrior (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">士</span>) of the ancient chariot. The chapter is a sequel of the preceding, and is joined on to it by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span>, as is also the next. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">玄用</span>, “The Use of the Mysterious (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>).” Such seems to be the meaning of the title. The chapter teaches that, if war were carried on, or rather avoided, according to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, the result would be success. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> own statements appear as so many paradoxes. They are examples of the procedure of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> by “contraries,” or opposites.</p>
					<p>We do not know who the master of the military art referred to was. Perhaps the author only adopted the style of quotation to express his own sentiments. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">知難</span>, “The Difficulty of being (rightly) Known.” The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> comprehends and rules all <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> teachings, as the members of a clan were all in the loins of their first father (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">宗</span>), and continue to look up to him; and the people of a state are all under the direction of their ruler; yet the philosopher had to complain of not being known. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> principle and rule or ruler was the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. His utterance here is very important. Compare the words of Confucius in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> <abbr>ch.</abbr> 37, et <abbr class="eoc">al.</abbr></p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-70-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a> is twice quoted by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</span>, though his text is not quite the same in both cases. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">知病</span>, “The Disease of Knowing.” Here, again, we have the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> working “by contraries,”⁠—in the matter of knowledge. Compare <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-71-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> with Confucius’s account of what knowledge is in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Analects</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>ch.</abbr> 17. The <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-71-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> is found in one place in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</i>, lengthened out by the addition of particles; but the variation is unimportant. In another place, however, he seems to have had the correct text before him.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-71-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a> in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</i> also lengthened out, but with an important variation (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不病</span> for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">病病</span>), and I cannot construe his text. His <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不</span> is probably a transcriber’s error. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">愛己</span>, “Loving one’s Self.” This title is taken from the expression in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-72-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a>; and the object of the chapter seems to be to show how such loving should be manifested, and to enforce the lesson by the example of the “sage,” the true master of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.</p>
					<p>In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-72-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> “the great dread” is death, and the things which ought to be feared and maybe feared, are the indulgences of the appetites and passions, which, if not eschewed, tend to shorten life and accelerate the approach of death.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-72-p-2"><abbr>Pars.</abbr> 2</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-72-p-3">3</a> are supplementary to <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-72-p-1">1</a>. For <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">狹</span>, the second character of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung’s</span> text in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-72-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span> reads <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">狎</span>, which has the same name as the other; and according to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi’s</span> dictionary</i>, the two characters are interchangeable. I have also followed <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> in adopting <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">狎</span> for the former of the two <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">厭</span> in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-72-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> adopted this reading from a commentator <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu-ling</span>. It gives a good meaning, and is supported by the structure of other sentences made on similar lines.</p>
					<p>In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-72-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a> “the sage” must be “the ruler who is a sage,” a master of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, “the king” of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-25"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 25</a>. He “loves himself,” <abbr>i.e.</abbr> his life, and takes the right measures to prolong his life, but without any demonstration that he is doing so.</p>
					<p id="note-97-p-5">The above is, I conceive, the correct explanation of the chapter; but as to the Chinese critics and foreign translators of it, it maybe said, “<i xml:lang="la">Quot homines, tot sententiae.</i>” In illustration of this I venture to subjoin what is found on it in the old version of the Jesuit missionaries, which has not been previously printed:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote xml:lang="la">
						<div>
							<header>
								<p>Prima explicatio juxta interpretes.</p>
							</header>
							<p>Populus, ubi jam principis iram non timet, nihil non audet ut jugum excutiat, resque communis ad extremum discrimen adducitur.</p>
							<p>Ambitio principis non faciat terram angustiorem, et vectigalium magnitudine alendo populo insufficientem; numquam populus patriae pertaesus alias terras quaeret.</p>
							<p>Vitae si non taedet, neque patrii soli taedebit.</p>
							<p>Quare sanctus sibi semper attentus potentiam suam non ostentat.</p>
							<p>Quia vere se amat, non se pretiosum facit; vel quia sibi recte consulit non se talem aestimat cujus felicitati et honori infelices populi unice servire debeant, immo potius eum se reputat qui populorum felicitati totum se debeat impendere.</p>
							<p>Ergo illud resecat, istud amplectitur.</p>
						</div>
						<div>
							<header>
								<p>Alia explicatio.</p>
							</header>
							<p>Populus si non ita timet principis majestatem, sed facile ad eum accedit, majestas non minuitur, immo ad summum pervenit.</p>
							<p>Vectigalibus terra si non opprimitur, suâ quisque contentus alias terras non quaeret, si se non vexari populus experitur.</p>
							<p>Vitae si non taedet, nec patrii soli taedebit.</p>
							<p>Quare sanctus majestatis fastum non affectat, immo similem se caeteris ostendit.</p>
							<p>Sibi recte consulens, populorum amans, non se pretiosum et inaccessibilem facit.</p>
							<p>Quidquid ergo timorem incutere potest, hoc evitat; quod amorem conciliat et benignitatem, se demonstrat hoc eligi et ultro amplectitur.</p>
						</div>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">任爲</span>. “Allowing Men to take their Course.” The chapter teaches that rulers should not be hasty to punish, especially by the infliction of death. Though they may seem to err in leniency, yet heaven does not allow offenders to escape.</p>
					<p>While heaven hates the ill-doer, yet we must not always conclude from its judgements that every one who suffers from them is an ill-doer; and the two lines which rhyme, and illustrate this point, are equivalent to the sentiment in our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Old Book</i>, “Clouds and darkness are round about Him.” They are ascribed to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh-tzŭ</span> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 7 a); but, it has been said, that they are quoted by him “in an entirely different connection.” But the same text in two different sermons may be said to be in different connections. In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh-tzŭ</i> and our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i> the lines have the same meaning, and substantially the same application. Indeed <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Chan</span>, of our fourth century, the commentator of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh-tzŭ</i>, quotes the comment of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span> on this passage, condensing it into, “Who can know the mind of Heaven? Only the sage can do so.” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">制惑</span>, “Restraining Delusion.” The chapter sets forth the inefficiency of capital punishment, and warns rulers against the infliction of it. Who is it that superintends the infliction of death? The answer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> is very clear:⁠—“It is Heaven, which, dwelling on high and ruling all beneath, takes note of the transgressions of men.” There is a slight variation in the readings of the second sentence of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-74-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a> in the texts of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span>, and the reading adopted by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span> differs a little from them both; but the meaning is the same in them all.</p>
					<p>This chapter and the next are rightly joined on to the preceding by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">貪損</span>, “How Greediness Injures.” The want of the nothing-doing <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> leads to the multiplication of exactions by the government, and to the misery of the people, so as to make them think lightly of death. The chapter is a warning for both rulers and people.</p>
					<p>It is not easy to determine whether rulers, or people or both, are intended in the concluding sentence of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-75-p-2"><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">戒強</span>, “A Warning against (trusting in) Strength.” To trust in one’s force is contrary to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, whose strength is more in weakness and humility.</p>
					<p>In <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-76-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a> the two characters which I have rendered by “(so it is with) all things” are found in the texts of both <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span>, but <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span> both reject them. I should also have neglected them, but they are also found in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsiang’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shuo Wên</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> 4 a), with all the rest of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-76-p-1"><abbr>pars.</abbr> 1</a> and <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-76-p-2">2</a>, as from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>. They are an anacoluthon, such as is elsewhere found in our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i>; <abbr>e.g.</abbr><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">天下之牝</span> in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-21-p-2"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 21, <abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a>.</p>
					<p>The “above” and “below” in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-76-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a> seem to be merely a play on the words, as capable of meaning “more and less honourable.” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">天道</span>, “The Way of Heaven;” but the chapter contrasts that way, unselfish and magnanimous, with the way of man, selfish and contracted, and illustrates the point by the method of stringing a bow. This must be seen as it is done in China fully to understand the illustration. I have known great athletes in this country tasked to the utmost of their strength to adjust and bend a large Chinese bow from Peking.</p>
					<p>The “sage” of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-77-p-4"><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a> is the “King” of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-25"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 25</a>. Compare what is said of him with <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-2-p-4"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 2, <abbr>par.</abbr> 4</a>, et <abbr class="eoc">al.</abbr> <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">任信</span>, “Thing to be Believed.” It is difficult to give a short and appropriate translation of this title. The chapter shows how the most unlikely results follow from action according to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-78-p-1"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 1</a>. Water was <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> favourite emblem of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. Compare <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-8">chapters 8</a>, <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-66">66</a>, et <abbr class="eoc">al.</abbr></p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-78-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a>. Compare <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-36-p-2"><abbr>ch.</abbr> 36, <abbr>par.</abbr> 2</a>.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-78-p-3"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 3</a>. Of course we do not know who the sage was from whom <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> got the lines of this paragraph. They may suggest to some readers the lines of Burns, as they have done to me:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“This honest man, though e’er so poor,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is king o’ men for a’ that.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">But the Taoist of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> is a higher ideal than Burn’s honest man.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-78-p-4"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 4</a> is separated from this chapter, and made to begin the next by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">任契</span>, “Adherence to Bond or Covenant.” The chapter shows, but by no means clearly, how he who holds fast to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> will be better off in the end than he who will rather try to secure his own interests.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-79-p-1"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 1</a> presents us with a case which the statements of the chapter are intended to meet:⁠—two disputants, one good, and the other bad; the latter, though apparently reconciled, still retaining a grudge, and ready to wreak his dissatisfaction, when he has an opportunity. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲</span> = “for,” “for the good of.”</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-79-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a> is intended to solve the question. The terms of a contract or agreement were inscribed on a slip of wood, which was then divided into two; each party having one half of it. At the settlement, if the halves perfectly fitted to each other, it was carried through. The one who had the right in the dispute has his part of the agreement, but does not insist on it, and is forbearing; the other insists on the conditions being even now altered in his favour. The characters by which this last case is expressed, are very enigmatical, having reference to the satisfaction of the government dues of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> time⁠—a subject into which it would take much space to go.</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-79-p-3"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 3</a> decides the question by the action of heaven, which is only another name for the course of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">獨立</span>, “Standing Alone.” The chapter sets forth what <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> conceived the ancient government of simplicity was, and what he would have government in all time to be. He does not use the personal pronoun “I” as the subject of the thrice-recurring <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">使</span>, but it is most natural to suppose that he is himself that subject; and he modestly supposes himself in charge of a little state and a small population. The reader can judge for himself of the consummation that would be arrived at;⁠—a people rude and uninstructed, using quippos, abstaining from war and all travelling, kept aloof from intercourse even with their neighbours, and without the appliances of what we call civilisation.</p>
					<p>The text is nearly all found in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>. The first member of <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-80-p-1"><abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a>, however is very puzzling. The old Jesuit translators, <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span>, Chalmers, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> von Strauss, all differ in their views of it. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span> take what I have now rendered by “abilities,” as meaning “implements of agriculture,” but their view is based on a custom of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty, which is not remote enough for the purpose, and on the suppression, after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span>, of a <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung’s</span> text. <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顯質</span>, “The Manifestation of Simplicity.” The chapter shows how quietly and effectively the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> proceeds, and by contraries in a way that only the master of it can understand. The author, says <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span>, “sums up in this the subject-matter of the two parts of his treatise, showing that in all its five thousand characters, there is nothing beyond what is here said.”</p>
					<p><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-81-p-2"><abbr>Par.</abbr> 2</a> suggests to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Chalmers the well-known lines of Bunyan as an analogue of it:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“A man there was, though some did count him mad,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The more he gave away, the more he had.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> brings together two sentences from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span> 21 b, 22 a), written evidently with the characters of this text in mind, which as from a Taoist mint, are a still better analogue, and I venture to put them into rhyme:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Amassing but to him a sense of need betrays;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He hoards not, and thereby his affluence displays.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>I have paused long over the first pair of contraries in <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-81-p-3"><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">利</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">害</span>). Those two characters primarily mean “sharpness” and “wounding by cutting;” they are also often used in the sense of “being beneficial,” and “being injurious;”⁠—“contraries,” both of them. Which “contrary” had <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> in mind? I must think the former, though differing in this from all previous translators. The Jesuit version is, “<i xml:lang="la">Celestis <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> natura ditat omnes, nemini nocet;</i>” <span xml:lang="fr">Julien’s</span>, “<i xml:lang="fr">Il est utile aux êtres, et ne leur nuit point;</i>” Chalmers’s, “Benefits and does not injure;” and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> von Strauss’s, “<i xml:lang="de">Des Himmels Weise ist wolthun und nicht beschädigen.</i>” <a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
