<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Texts of the Tao Te Ching and Chuang-Tzŭ Shu, as Regards Their Authenticity and Genuineness, and the Arrangement of Them</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="translators-intro-2" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Texts of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-Tzŭ Shu</i>, as Regards Their Authenticity and Genuineness, and the Arrangement of Them</h2>
			<p id="translators-intro-2-p-1">I will now state briefly, first, the grounds on which I accept the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i> as a genuine production of the age to which it has been assigned, and the truth of its authorship by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> to whom it has been ascribed. It would not have been necessary a few years ago to write as if these points could be called in question, but in 1886 <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Herbert <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Giles, of Her Majesty’s Consular Service in China, and one of the ablest Chinese scholars living, vehemently called them in question in an article in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">China Review</i> for the months of March and April. His strictures have been replied to, and I am not going to revive here the controversy which they produced, but only to state a portion of the evidence which satisfies my own mind on the two points just mentioned.</p>
			<p>It has been said above that the year <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 604 was, probably, that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> birth. The year of his death is not recorded. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</span>, the first great Chinese historian, who died in about <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 85, commences his <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">“Biographies”</span> with a short account of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>. He tells us that the philosopher had been a curator of the Royal Library of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, and that, mourning over the decadence of the dynasty, he wished to withdraw from the world, and proceeded to the pass or defile of Hangu,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> leading from China to the west. There he was recognised by the warden of the pass, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin Hsi</span> (often called <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan Yin</span>), himself a well-known Taoist, who insisted on his leaving him a writing before he went into seclusion. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> then wrote his views on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> and its Characteristics</i>, in two parts or sections, containing more than 5,000 characters, gave the manuscript to the warden, and went his way;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> “nor is it known where he died.” This account is strange enough, and we need not wonder that it was by and by embellished with many marvels. It contains, however, the definite statements that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> wrote the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i> in two parts, and consisting of more than 5,000 characters. And that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span> was himself well acquainted with the treatise is apparent from his quotations from it, with, in almost every case, the specification of the author. He thus adduces part of the first chapter, and a large portion of the last chapter but one. His brief reference also to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> and his writings are numerous.</p>
			<p id="translators-intro-2-p-3">But between <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</span> there were many Taoist writers whose works remain. I may specify of them <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh-tzŭ</span> (assuming that his chapters, though not composed in their present form by him, may yet be accepted as fair specimens of his teaching); <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> (of the fourth century <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>. We find him refusing to accept high office from king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>, <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 339⁠–⁠299); <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span>, a voluminous author, who died by his own hand in <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 230; and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu An</span>, a scion of the Imperial House of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span>, king of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan</span>, and better known to us as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huan-nan Tzŭ</span>, who also died by his own hand in <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 122. In the books of all these men we find quotations of many passages that are in our treatise. They are expressly said to be, many of them, quotations from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span> several times all but shows the book beneath his eyes. To show how numerous the quotations by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu An</span> are, let it be borne in mind that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i> has come down to us as divided into eighty-one short chapters; and that the whole of it is shorter than the shortest of our <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gospels</span>. Of the eighty-one chapters, either the whole or portions of seventy-one are found in those two writers. There are other authors not so decidedly Taoistic, in whom we find quotations from the little book. These quotations are in general wonderfully correct. Various readings indeed there are; but if we were sure that the writers did trust to memory, their differences would only prove that copies of the text had been multiplied from the very first.</p>
			<p>In passing on from quotations to the complete text, I will clinch the assertion that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span> was well acquainted with our treatise, by a passage from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Former <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> Dynasty</i> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 206⁠–⁠<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 24), which was begun to be compiled by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pan Ku</span>, who died however in 92, and left a portion to be completed by his sister, the famous <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pan Chao</span>. The thirty-second chapter of his <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">“Biographies”</span> is devoted to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</span>, and towards the end it is said that “on the subject of the Great <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> he preferred <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span> to the six <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ching</i>.” “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span>” must there be the writings of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang Ti</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>. The association of the two names also illustrates the antiquity claimed for Taoism, and the subject of <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4">endnote 4</a>.</p>
			<p>We go on from quotations to complete texts, and turn, first, to the catalogue of the Imperial Library of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span>, as compiled by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsin</span>, not later than the commencement of our Christian era. There are entered in it Taoist works by thirty-seven different authors, containing in all 993 chapters or sections (<i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pʽien</i>). <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi Yin</span>, the premier of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽêng Tʽang</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 1766), heads the list with fifty-one sections. There are in it four editions of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi’s</span> work with commentaries:⁠—by a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lin, in four sections; a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fu, in thirty-seven sections; a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hsü, in six sections; and by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsiang</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsin’s</span> own father, in four sections. All these four works have since perished, but there they were in the Imperial Library before our era began. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> is in the same list in fifty-two books or sections, the greater part of which have happily escaped the devouring tooth of time.</p>
			<p>We turn now to the twentieth chapter of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien’s</span> <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">“Biographies”</span>, in which he gives an account of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh Yi</span>, the scion of a distinguished family, and who himself played a famous part, both as a politician and military leader, and became prince of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang-chu</span> under the kingdom of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span> in <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 279. Among his descendants was a <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh Chʽên</span>, who learned in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> “the words,” that is, the Taoistic writings “of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang Ti</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> from an old man who lived on the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ho</i>-side.” The origin of this old man was not known, but <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh Chʽên</span> taught what he learned from him to a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ko</span>, who again became preceptor to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Tsʽan</span>, the chief minister of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, and afterwards of the new dynasty of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span>, dying in <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 190.</p>
			<p id="translators-intro-2-p-7">Referring now to the catalogue of the Imperial Library of the dynasty of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sui</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 502⁠–⁠556), we find that it containd many editions of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> treatise with commentaries. The first mentioned is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</span></i>, with the commentary of the old man of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ho</i>-side, in the time of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 179⁠–⁠142). It is added in a note that the dynasty of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liang</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 502⁠–⁠556) had possessed the edition of “the old man of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ho</i>-side, of the time of the Warring States; but that with some other texts and commentaries it had disappeared.” I find it difficult to believe that there had been two old men of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ho</i>-side,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> both teachers of Taoism and commentators on our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i>, but I am willing to content myself with the more recent work, and accept the copy that has been current⁠—say from <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 150, when <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</span> could have been little more than a boy. Taoism was a favourite study with many of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> emperors and their ladies. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan Tzŭ</span>, of whose many quotations from the text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span> I have spoken, was an uncle of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>. To emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 156⁠–⁠143), the son of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>, there is attributed the designation of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> treatise as a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ching</i>, a work of standard authority. At the beginning of his reign, we are told, some one was commending to him four works, among which were those of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>. Deeming that the work of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang-tzŭ</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span> was of a deeper character than the others, he ordered that it should be called a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ching</i>, established a board for the study of Taoism, and issued an edict that the book should be learned and recited at court, and throughout the country.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> Thenceforth it was so styled. We find <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang-fu Mi</span> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 215⁠–⁠282) referring to it as the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tao Te Ching</i>.</p>
			<p id="translators-intro-2-p-8">The second place in the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sui</span> catalogue is given to the text and commentary of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Fu-ssŭ</span>, an extraordinary scholar who died in <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 249, at the early age of twenty-four. This work has always been much prized. It was its text which <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu Tê-ming</span> used in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Explanation of the Terms and Phrases of the Classics</i>, in the seventh century. Among the editions of it which I possess is that printed in 1794 with the imperial moveable metal types.</p>
			<p>I need not speak of editions or commentaries subsequent to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi’s</span>. They soon begin to be many, and are only not so numerous as those of the Confucian Classics.</p>
			<p>All the editions of the book are divided into two parts, the former called <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">“Tao”</span>, and the latter <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">“Tê”</span>, meaning the Qualities or Characteristics of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, but this distinction of subjects is by no means uniformly adhered to.</p>
			<p id="translators-intro-2-p-11">I referred already to the division of the whole into eighty-one short chapters (37 + 44), which is by common tradition attributed to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span>, or “The old man of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ho</i>-side.” Another very early commentator, called <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Tsun</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Chün-ping</span>, made a division into seventy-two chapters (40 + 32), under the influence, no doubt, of some mystical considerations. His predecessor, perhaps, had no better reason for his eighty-one; but the names of his chapters were, for the most part, happily chosen, and have been preserved. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> arranged the two parts in sixty-seven chapters (31 + 36). It is a mistake, however, to suppose, as even <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wylie with all his general accuracy did,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> “curtails the ordinary text to some extent.” He does not curtail, but only rearranges according to his fashion, uniting some of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung’s</span> chapters in one, and sometimes altering the order their clauses.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</span> tells us that, as the treatise came from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-pinyin">Laozi</span>, it contained more than 5,000 characters; that is, as one critic says, “more than 5,000 and fewer than 6,000.” <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung’s</span> text has 5,350, and one copy 5,590; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi’s</span>, 5,683, and one copy 5,610. Two other early texts have been counted, giving 5,720 and 5,635 characters respectively. The brevity arises from the terse conciseness of the style, owing mainly to the absence of the embellishment of particles, which forms so striking a peculiarity in the composition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i>.</p>
			<p>In passing on to speak, secondly and more briefly, of the far more voluminous writings of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>, I may say that I do not know of any other book so ancient a date as the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Te Ching</i>, of which the authenticity of the origin and genuineness of the text can claim to be so well substantiated.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
