<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Preface by James Legge</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="translators-preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Preface by James Legge</h2>
			<p>In the <cite>“Preface” to the third volume of these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Books of the East</i> (1879)</cite>, I stated that I proposed giving in due course, in order to exhibit the System of Taoism, translations of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i> by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> (sixth century <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>), the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Writings of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span></i> (between the middle of the fourth and third centuries <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>), and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Treatise of “Actions and Their Retributions”</i> (of our eleventh century); and perhaps also of one or more of the other characteristic Productions of the System.</p>
			<p>The two volumes now submitted to the reader are a fulfilment of the promise made so long ago. They contain versions of the three works which were specified, and, in addition, as appendixes, four other shorter treatises of Taoism; analyses of several of the books of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lin Hsi-chung</span>; a list of the stories which form so important a part of those books; two essays by two of the greatest Scholars of China, written the one in <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 586 and illustrating the Taoistic beliefs of that age, and the other in <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1078 and dealing with the four books of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>, whose genuineness is frequently called in question. The concluding index is confined very much to proper names. For subjects the reader is referred to the tables of contents, the introduction to the books of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> (<cite><abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 127⁠–⁠163</cite>), and the introductory notes to the various appendixes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Treatise of Actions and their Retributions</i> exhibits to us the Taoism of the eleventh century in its moral or ethical aspects; in the two earlier works we see it rather as a philosophical speculation than as a religion in the ordinary sense of that term. It was not till after the introduction of Buddhism into China in our first century that Taoism began to organise itself as a religion, having its monasteries and nunneries, its images and rituals. While it did so, it maintained the superstitions peculiar to itself:⁠—some, like the cultivation of the Tao as a rule of life favourable to longevity, come down from the earliest times, and others which grew up during the decay of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> dynasty, and subsequently blossomed;⁠—now in mystical speculation; now in the pursuits of alchemy; now in the search for the pills of immortality and the elixir vitae; now in astrological fancies; now in visions of spirits and in magical arts to control them; and finally in the terrors of its purgatory and everlasting hell. Its phases have been continually changing, and at present it attracts our notice more as a degraded adjunct of Buddhism than as a development of the speculations of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>. Up to its contact with Buddhism, it subsisted as an opposition to the Confucian system, which, while admitting the existence and rule of the Supreme Being, bases its teaching on the study of man’s nature and the enforcement of the duties binding on all men from the moral and social principles of their constitution.</p>
			<p>It is only during the present century that the Texts of Taoism have begun to receive the attention which they deserve. Christianity was introduced into China by Nestorian missionaries in the seventh century; and from the Xi’an monument, which was erected by their successors in 781, nearly 150 years after their first entrance, we perceive that they were as familiar with the books of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> as with the Confucian literature of the empire, but that monument is the only memorial of them that remains. In the thirteenth century the Roman Catholic Church sent its earliest missionaries to China, but we hardly know anything of their literary labours.</p>
			<p>The great Romish mission which continue to the present day began towards the end of the sixteenth century; and there exists now in the India Office a translation of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i> in Latin, which was brought to English by a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Matthew Raper, and presented by him to the Royal Society, of which he was a Fellow, on January 10th, 1788. The manuscript is in excellent preservation, but we do not know by whom the version was made. It was presented, as stated in the <cite><a href="translators-intro-3.xhtml#translators-intro-3-p-1"><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">“Introduction,”</span> <abbr>par.</abbr> 1</a></cite>, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raper by <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> de Grammont, <span xml:lang="la">Missionarius Apostolicus, ex-Jesuita</span>. The chief object of the translator or translators was to show that “the Mysteries of the Most Holy Trinity and of the Incarnate God were anciently known to the Chinese nation.” The version as a whole is of little value. The reader will find, in <cite><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97-p-5">endnotes 97</a></cite>, its explanation of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> <cite><a href="tao-te-ching.xhtml#chapter-72">seventy-second chapter</a></cite>;⁠—the first morsel of it that has appeared in print.</p>
			<p>Protestant missions to China commenced in 1807; but it was not till 1868 that the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Chalmers, a member of one of them, published his <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Speculations on Metaphysics, Polity, and Morality of “The Old Philosopher,” <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span></i></cite>. Meanwhile, <span xml:lang="fr">Abel-Rémusat</span> had aroused the curiosity of scholars throughout Europe, in 1823, by his <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir on the Life and Opinions of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, a Chinese Philosopher of the sixth century before our era, who professed the opinions commonly attributed to Pythagoras, to Plato, and to their disciples</i></cite>. <span xml:lang="fr">Rémusat</span> was followed by one who had received from him his first lessons in Chinese, and had become a truly great Chinese scholar⁠—the late <span xml:lang="fr">Stanislas Julien</span>. He published in 1842 “a complete translation for the first time of this memorable work, which is regarded with reason as the most profound, the most abstract, and the most difficult of all Chinese literature.” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Chalmers’s translation was also complete, but his comments, whether original or from Chinese sources, were much fewer than those supplied by <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span>. Two years later, two German versions of the treatise were published at Leipzig;⁠—by Reinhold von <span xml:lang="de">Plänckner</span> and Victor von Strauss, differing much from each other, but both marked by originality and ability.</p>
			<p>I undertook myself, as stated above, in 1879 to translate for <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Sacred Books of the East</i> the texts of Taoism which appear in these volumes; and, as I could find time from my labours on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Texts of Confucianism</i>, I had written out more than one version of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> work by the end of 1880. Though not satisfied with the result, I felt justified in exhibiting my general views of it in an article in the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British Quarterly Review</i> of July, 1883</cite>.</p>
			<p>In 1884 <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Balfour published at Shanghai a version of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Taoist Texts, Ethical, Political, and Speculative</i>. His Texts were ten in all, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i> being the first and longest of them. His version of this differed in many points from all previous versions; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Giles, of <abbr class="initialism">H.M.</abbr>’s Consular Service in China, vehemently assailed it and also <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Chalmers’s translation, in the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">China Review</i> for March and April, 1886</cite>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Giles, indeed, occasionally launched a shaft also at <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> and myself; but his main object in his article was to discredit the genuineness and authenticity of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i> itself. “The work,” he says, “is undoubtedly a forgery. It contains, indeed, much that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> did say, but more that he did not.” I replied, so far as was necessary, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Giles in the same <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Review</i> for January and February, 1888</cite>; and a brief summary of my reply is given in the <cite><a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#translators-intro-2-p-1">second chapter of the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">“Introduction”</span></a></cite> in this volume. My confidence has never been shaken for a moment in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i> as genuine relic of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, one of the most original minds of the Chinese race.</p>
			<p>In preparing the version now published, I have used:⁠—</p>
			<p>First, <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Complete Works of the Ten Philosophers</i></cite>;⁠—a Suzhou reprint in 1804 of the best editions of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Philosophers</i>, nearly all belonging more or less to the Taoist school, included in it. It is a fine specimen of Chinese printing, clear and accurate. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Treatise</i> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> of course occupies the first place, as edited by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuei Yu-kuang</span> (better known as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuei Chên-chʽuan</span>) of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> dynasty. The text and commentary are those of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-shang Kung</span> (<cite><a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#translators-intro-2-p-7"><abbr>Introd.</abbr>, <abbr>par.</abbr> 7</a></cite>), along with the division of the whole into parts and eighty-one chapters, and the titles of the several chapters, all attributed to him. Along the top of the page, there is a large collection of notes from celebrated commentators and writers down to the editor himself.</p>
			<p>Second, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Text and Commentary of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pi</span></i> (called also <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu-ssŭ</span>), who died <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 249, at the early age of twenty-four. See <cite><a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#translators-intro-2-p-8"><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">“Introduction,”</span> <abbr>par.</abbr> 8</a></cite>.</p>
			<p>Third, <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><i>Helps</i> (<abbr>lit.</abbr> Wings) <i>to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span></i></span>; by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span> (called also <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jo-hou</span>), and prefaced by him in 1587. This is what <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> calls “the most extensive and most important contribution to the understanding of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, which we yet possess.” Its contents are selected from the ablest writings on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Treatise</i> from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Fei</span> (<cite><a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#translators-intro-2-p-3"><abbr>Introd.</abbr>, <abbr>par.</abbr> 3</a></cite>) downwards, closing in many chapters with the notes made by the compiler himself in the course of his studies. Altogether the book sets before us the substance of the views of sixty-four writers on our short <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</i>. <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> took the trouble to analyse the list of them, and found it composed of three emperors, twenty professed Taoists, seven Buddhists, and thirty-four Confucianists or members of the literati. He says, “These last constantly explain <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> according to the ideas peculiar to the school of Confucius, at the risk of misrepresenting him, and with the express intention of throttling his system;” then adding, “The commentaries written in such a spirit have no interest for persons who wish to enter fully into the thought of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, and obtain a just idea of his doctrine. I have thought it useless, therefore, to specify the names of such commentaries and their authors.”</p>
			<p>I have quoted these sentences of <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span>, because of a charge brought by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Balfour, in a prefatory note to his own version of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i>, against him and other translators. “One prime defect,” he says, though with some hesitation, “lies at the root of every translation that has been published hitherto; and this is, that not one seems to have been based solely and entirely on commentaries furnished by members of the Taoist school. The Confucian element enters largely into all; and here, I think, an injustice has been done to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>. To a Confucianist the Taoist system is in every sense of the word a heresy, and a commentator holding his opinion is surely not the best expositor. It is as a grammarian rather than as a philosopher that a member of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ju Chia</span> deals with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i>; he gives the sense of a passage according to the syntactical construction rather than according to the genius of the philosophy itself; and in attempting to explain the text by his own canons, instead of by the canons of Taoism, he mistakes the superficial and apparently obvious meaning for the hidden and esoteric interpretation.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Balfour will hardly repeat his charge of imperfect or erroneous interpretation against <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span>; and I believe that is equally undeserved by most, if not all, of the other translators against whom it is directed. He himself adopted as his guide the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Explanations of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</span></i></cite>, current as the work of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Yen</span> (called also <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Tsu</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Tung-pin</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Chʽung-yang</span>), a Taoist of the eighth century. Through <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Balfour’s kindness I have had an opportunity of examining this edition of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Treatise</i>; and I am compelled to agree with the very unfavourable judgement on it pronounced by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Giles as both “spurious” and “ridiculous.” All that we are told of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Yen</span> is very suspicious; much of it evidently false. The editions of our little book ascribed to him are many. I have for more than twenty years possessed one with the title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Meaning of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</span> Explained by the <strong>True</strong> Man of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽung-yang</span></i>, being a reprint of 1690, and as different as possible from the work patronised by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Balfour.</p>
			<p>Fourth, the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai Shang Hsüan Yüan Tao Tê Ching</i></cite>⁠—a work of the present dynasty, published at Shanghai, but when produced I do not know. It is certainly of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Tsu</span> type, and is worth purchasing as one of the finest specimens of block-printing. It professes to be the production of “The Immortals of the Eight Grottoes,” each of whom is styled “a Divine Ruler (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ti Chün</span>).” The eighty-one chapters are equally divided for commentary among them, excepting that “the Divine Ruler, the Universal Refiner,” has the last eleven assigned to him. The text is everywhere broken up into short clauses, which are explained in a very few characters by “God, the True Helper,” the same, I suppose, who is also styled, “The Divine Ruler, the True Helper,” and comments at length on chapters 31 to 40. I mention these particulars as an illustration of how the ancient Taoism has become polytheistic and absurd. The name “God, the True Helper,” is a title, I imagine, given to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Tsu</span>. With all this nonsense, the composite commentary is a good one, the work, evidently, of one hand. One of the several recommendatory preface is ascribed to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên Chʽang</span>, the god of literature; and he specially praises the work, as “explaining the meaning by examination of the text.”</p>
			<p>Fifth, a <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collection of the Most Important Treatises of the Taoist Fathers</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tsu Chên Chʽuan Chi Yao</i>)</cite>. This was reprinted in 1877 at Changzhou in Jiangsu; beginning with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i>, and ending with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kan Ying Pʽien</i>. Between these there are fourteen other treatises, mostly short, five of them being among <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Balfour’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Taoist Texts</i>. The collection was edited by a <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu Yü</span>; and the commentary selected by him, in all but the last treatise, was by a <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Hsi-yüeh</span>, who appears to have been a recluse in a monastery on a mountain in the department of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pao-ning</span>, Sichuan, if, indeed, what is said of him be not entirely fabulous.</p>
			<p>Sixth, the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Commentary on the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</span></i></cite>, by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> (<abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1249⁠–⁠1333) of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lin Chʽuan</span>. This has been of the highest service to me. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> was the greatest of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan</span> scholars. He is one of the literati quoted from occasionally by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Hung</span> in his <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wings</i></cite>; but by no means so extensively as <span xml:lang="fr">Julien</span> supposes (<cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">“Observations Détachées”</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span></cite>). My own copy of his work is in the 12th section of the large <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collection of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh-ya</span> Hall</i></cite>, published in 1853. Writing of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽêng</span> in 1865 (<cite>“<abbr>Proleg.</abbr>” to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 36</cite>), I said that he was “a bold thinker and a daring critic, handling his text with a freedom which I had not seen in any other Chinese scholar.” The subsequent study of his writings has confirmed me in this opinion of him. Perhaps he might be characterised as an independent, rather than as a bold, thinking, and the daring of his criticism must not be supposed to be without caution. (See <cite><a href="translators-intro-2.xhtml#translators-intro-2-p-11">“<abbr>Introd.,</abbr>” <abbr>p. 9</abbr></a></cite>.)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></p>
			<p>I have thus set forth all that is necessary to be said here by way of preface. For various information about the treatises comprised in the appendixes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> the reader is referred to the preliminary notes, which preceded the translation of most of them. I have often sorely missed the presence of a competent native scholar who would have assisted me in the quest of references, and in talking over difficult passages. Such a helper would have saved me much time; but the result, I think, would scarcely have appeared in any great alteration of my versions.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">
					<abbr class="name eoc">J. L.</abbr>
				</p>
				<p>Oxford,</p>
				<p>
					<time datetime="1890-12-20"><i>December</i> 20, 1890.</time>
				</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
