<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Accounts of Lao-Tzŭ and Chuang-Tzŭ Given by Ssŭ-Ma Chʽien.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="translators-intro-4" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Accounts of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-Tzŭ</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-Tzŭ</span> Given by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-Ma Chʽien</span>.</h2>
			<p>It seems desirable, before passing from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang</span> in this <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">“Introduction”</span>, to give a place in it to what is said about them by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</span>. I have said that not a single proper name occurs in the <i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i>. There is hardly an historical allusion in it. Only one chapter, the <cite>twentieth</cite>, has somewhat of an autobiographical character. It tells us, however, of no incidents of his life. He appears alone in the world through his cultivation of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span>, melancholy and misunderstood, yet binding that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> more closely to his bosom.</p>
			<p>The books of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chunag-tzŭ</span> are of a different nature, abounding in pictures of Taoist life, in anecdotes and narratives, graphic, argumentative, often satirical. But they are not historical. Confucius and many of his disciples, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span> and members of his school, heroes and sages of antiquity, and men of his own day, move across his pages; but the incidents in connection with which they are introduced are probably fictitious, and devised by him “to point his moral or adorn his tale.” His names of individuals and places are often like those of Bunyan in his <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book">Pilgrim’s Progress</i></cite> or his <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book">Holy War</i></cite>, emblematic of their characters and the doctrines which he employs them to illustrate. He often comes on the stage himself, and there is an air of verisimilitude in his descriptions, possibly also a certain amount of fact about them; but we cannot appeal to them as historical testimony. It is only to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ-ma Chʽien</span> that we can go for this; he always writes in the spirit of a historian; but what he has to tell us of the two men is not much.</p>
			<p>And first, as to his account of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>. When he wrote, about the beginning of the first century <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>, the Taoist master was already known as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span>, however, tells us that his surname was <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li</span>, and his name <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Êrh</span>, meaning “Ear,”which gave place after his death to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tan</span>, meaning “Long-eared,” form which we may conclude that he was named from some peculiarity in the form of his ears. He was a native of the state of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>, which had then extended far beyond its original limits, and his birthplace was in the present province of Henan or of Anhui. He was a curator in the Royal Library; and when Confucius visited the capital in the year <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 517, the two men met. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span> says that Confucius’s visit to Luoyang was that he might question <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span> on the subject of ceremonies. He might have other objects in mind as well; but however that was, the two met. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li</span> said to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung</span>, “The men about whom you talk are dead, and their bones are mouldered to dust; only their words are left. Moreover, when the superior man gets his opportunity, he mounts aloft; but when the time is against him, he is carried along by the force of circumstances.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a> I have heard that a good merchant, though he have rich treasures safely stored, appears as if he were poor; and that the superior man, though his virtue be complete, is yet to outward seeming stupid. Put away your proud air and many desires, your insinuating habit and wild will. THey are of no advantage to you;⁠—this is all I have to tell you.” Confucius is made to say to his disciples after the interview: “I know how birds can fly, fishes can swim, and animals run. But the runner may be snared, the swimmer hooked, and the flyer shot by the arrow. But there is the dragon:⁠—I cannot tell how he mounts on the wind through the clouds, and rises to heaven. Today I have seen <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, and can only compare him to the dragon.”</p>
			<p>In this speech of Confucius we have, I believe, the origin of the name <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, as applied to the master of Taoism. Its meaning is “The Old Philosopher,” or “The Old Gentleman.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a> Confucius might well so style <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Êrh</span>. At the time of this interview he was himself in his thirty-fifth year, and the other was in his eighty-eighth. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span> adds, “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> cultivated the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> and its attributes, the chief aim of his studies being how to keep himself concealed and remain unknown. He continued to reside at (the capital of) <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, but after a long time, seeing the decay of the dynasty, he left it and went away to the barrier-gate, leading out of the kingdom on the northwest. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin Hsi</span>, the warden of the gate, said to him, ‘You are about to withdraw yourself out of sight. Let me insist on your (first) composing for me a book.’ On this, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> wrote a book in two parts, setting forth his views on the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> and its attributes, in more than 5000 characters. He then went away, and it is not known where he died. He was a superior man, who lied to keep himself unknown.”</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span> finally traces <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> descendants down to the first century <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>, and concludes by saying, “Those who attach themselves to the doctrine of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> condemn that of the literati, and the literati on their part condemn <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, verifying the saying, ‘Parties whose principles are different cannot take counsel together.’ <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Êrh</span> taught that by doing nothing others are as a matter of course transformed, and that rectification in the same way ensues from being pure and still.”</p>
			<p>This morsel is all that we have of historical narrative about <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>. The account of writing of the <i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao Tê Ching</i> at the request of the warden of the barrier-gate has a doubtful and legendary appearance. Otherwise, the record is free from anything to raise suspicion about it. It says nothing about previous existences of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span>, and nothing of his travelling to the west, and learning there the doctrines which are embodied in his work. He goes through the pass out of the domain of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, and died no one knowing where.</p>
			<p>It is difficult, however, to reconcile this last statement with a narrative in the end of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ’s</span><cite>third book.</cite>. There we see <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> dead, and a crowd of mourners wailing round the corpse, and giving extraordinary demonstration of grief, which offend a disciple of a higher order, who has gone to the house to offer his condolences on the occasion. But for the peculiar nature of most of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-‘s</span> narratives, we should say, in opposition to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span>, that the place and time of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> death were well known. Possibly, however, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> may have invented the whole story, to give him the opportunity of setting forth what, according to his ideal of it, the life of a Taoist master should be, and how even <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span> himself fall short of it.</p>
			<p>Second, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien’s</span> account of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> is still more brief. He was a native, he tells us, of the territory of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng</span>, which belonged to the kingdom of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liang</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, and held an office, he does not say what, in the city of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi-yüan</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang</span> was thus of the same part of China as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, and probably grew up familiar with all his speculations and lessons. He lived during the reigns of kings <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liang</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsüan</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>. We cannot be wrong therefore in assigning his period to the latter half of the third, and earlier part of the fourth century <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>. He was thus a contemporary of Mencius. They visited at the same courts, and yet neither ever mentions the other. They were the two ablest debaters of their day, and fond of exposing what they deemed heresy. But it would only be a matter of useless speculation to try to account for their never having come into argumentative collision.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span> says: “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang</span> had made himself well acquainted with all the literature of his time, but preferred the views of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, and ranked himself among his followers, so that of the more than ten myriads of characters contained in his published writings the greater part are occupied with metaphorical illustrations of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao’s</span> doctrines. He made ‘the old fisherman,’ ‘the robber of <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chih</i>,’ and ‘the cutting open satchels,’ to satirize and expose the disciples of Confucius, and clearly exhibit the sentiments of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span>. Such names and characters as ‘<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei-lei Hsü</span>‘ and ‘<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-sang Tzŭ</span>‘ are fictitious, and the pieces where they occur are not to be understood as narratives of real events.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a></p>
			<p>“But <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang</span> was an admirable writer and skilful composer, and by his instances and truthful descriptions hit and exposed the Mohists and literati. The ablest scholars of his day could not escape his satire nor reply to it, while he allowed and enjoyed himself with his sparkling, dashing style; and thus it was that the greatest men, even kings and princes, could not use him for their purposes.</p>
			<p>“King <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>, having heard of the ability of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-chou</span>, sent messengers with large gifts to bring him to his court, and promising also that he would make him his chief minister. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>, however, only laughed and said to them, ‘A thousand ounces of silver are a great gain to me, and to be a high noble and minister is most honourable position. But have you not seen the victim-ox for the border sacrifice? It is carefully fed for several years, and robed with rich embroidery that it may be fit to enter the Grand Temple. When the time comes for it to do so, it would prefer to be a little pig, but it cannot get to be so. Go away quickly, and do not soil me with your presence. I had rather amuse and enjoy myself in the midst of a filthy ditch than be subject to the rules and restrictions in the court of a sovereign. I have determined never to take office, but prefer the enjoyment of my own free will.’ ”</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span> concludes his account of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> with the above story, condensed by him, probably, from two of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang’s</span> own narratives, in <cite><abbr>par.</abbr> 11 of <abbr>bk.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span></cite>, and <cite>13 of <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span></cite>, to the injury of them both. <cite>Paragraph 14 of <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span></cite> brings before us one of the last scenes of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-tzŭ’s</span> life, and we may doubt whether it should be received as from his own pencil. It is interesting in itself, however, and I introduce it here: “When <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> was about to die, his disciples signified their wish to give him a grand burial. ‘I shall have heaven and earth,’ he said, ‘for my coffin and its shell; the sun and moon for my two round symbols of jade; the stars and constellations for my pearls and jewels;⁠—will not the provisions for my interment be complete? What would you add to them?’ The disciples replied, ‘We are afraid that the crows and kites will eat our master.’ <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> rejoined, ‘Above, the crows and kites will eat me; below, the mole-crickets and ants will eat me; to take from those and give to these would only show your partiality.’ ”</p>
			<p>Such were among the last words of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span>. His end was not so impressive as that of Confucius; but it was in keeping with the general magniloquence and strong assertion of independence that marked all his course.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
